Skip to content





Menu
Donate
Book Review of Pornography: Fighting for Purity by Deepak Reju
 
 
 
 
By: Howard Eyrich
  March 19, 2019
Addictions, Book Review, Pornography, Sexual Sins
It just so happens that at the time of reading this book and writing this review, I am counseling one of many similar cases that involves a broken marriage as the consequence of a broad sexual addiction. Pornography, as so often is the case, was the genesis of the destruction. However, as Deepak Reju correctly observes, pornography is the fruit of a bad tree.

Structure and Plan
As part of the P&R 31 Day Devotionals for Life series, this book is written as a month of daily devotionals. The choices of Scripture passages are excellent. These passages provide an opportunity for the reader to daily engage a biblical principle in the spiritual warfare of dishabituation and rehabituation through the renewing of the mind. The reader is challenged to choose to recognize their incorrect perceptions of life and replace them with a biblically correct understanding of life.

The Intersection of Human and Divine in the Battle
The all-important relationship between personal responsibility and dependence upon the Spirit is reiterated throughout these devotional readings. Here is just one example: “As you trust in Christ’s sacrifice, the Holy Spirit quickens your conscience (Rom. 9:1; Heb. 9:14)” (p. 42). In another instance, the devotional title is, “Make No Provision for the Flesh” (p. 55). But this is not just an exhortation; rather, Reju leads the reader into some very practical thinking and the implementation of that new thinking in the battle with pornography.

Addresses a Variety of Heart Issues
Issues encountered in the matrix of counseling the person entrapped in pornography include pride, humility, temptation, shame, love, and the common phenomenon of self-berating that often becomes the excuse for not taking personal responsibility and slumping back into sin. Reju concludes the month of studies with a simple but biblical plan for moving forward.

For Whom Is This Devotional Useful?
Whether a person struggling with pornography is in counseling or an accountability group, this volume is a good supplement. The devotional would make a good companion homework assignment during the counseling process or an excellent assignment for a thirty-day test run when the counselor is ready to dismiss the counselee.

One last word: Even the seasoned biblical counselor will profit by taking this journey with Deepak. He provides a great reminder of simple and profound truth in capsule form.

About the Author

Howard Eyrich
Howard Eyrich (ThM, DMin) is a retired pastor and biblical counseling professor. He conducts a diverse ministry under the oversight of a Sessional Committee of his local church and the Owen Center of Auburn, Alabama. Howard conducts church seminars on Marriage and Family, Biblical Counselor Training, and Aging from a Biblical Perspective including Parenting Your Parent. He and his wife are blessed with two children, eight grandchildren and two great grandchildren.

Recent Posts by Howard Eyrich:

Using New Testament Narratives to Give Hope — November 16, 2022
Emotional Abuse: Do We Need One More Blog? — May 23, 2022
Book Review of Parenting & Disabilities: Abiding in God’s Presence by Stephanie Hubach — March 21, 2022
*As an Amazon Associate the BCC earns from qualifying purchases made through the Amazon links on our site. We appreciate your support!


Purchase this Book
*As an Amazon Associate the BCC earns from qualifying purchases made through the Amazon links on our site. We appreciate your support!

Stay Connected!
First Name
Enter your first name
Last Name
Enter your last name
Email Address
Email
Mobile Phone
(###) ###-####
The Biblical Counseling Coalition gratefully acknowledges Mission University for hosting our national office at 628 E. Kearney Street, Springfield, MO 65803.
 

The BCC exists to strengthen churches, para-church organizations, and educational institutions by promoting excellence and unity in biblical counseling as a means to accomplish compassionate outreach and effective discipleship.
The BCC Grace and Truth Blog
Browse by Topic
Browse by Resource Type
Browse by Author
Books
The Annual Guide
15:14 Podcast

Listen to 15:14 on Spotify

Partner Portal Login
About
Mission Statement
Doctrinal Statement
Confessional Statement
Leadership
Subscribe by Email
Donate

