WEEK 6: VANITY FAIR
Chapter Seven
Glossary
Vanity: Lack of substance; emptiness, specifically with regard to pleasure.
Pharaoh: The ruler of Egypt who enslaved and murdered God’s people (see Ex. 1-15).
Nebuchadnezzar: The ruler of Babylon who destroyed Jerusalem, carried God’s people off into exile, and 
demanded they worship his image (see 2 Kings 24-25; Dan. 1-3).
Darius: The ruler of Persia who held God’s people captive and insisted they not worship their God (see Dan. 6).
Synopsis
Having come through the wilderness, Faithful and Christian come to the town of Vanity, where there is a year-
round market called Vanity Fair. Before they enter, they are reunited with Evangelist who warns them that 
one of them will die there. After admonishing them to conduct themselves like men (1 Cor. 16:13), Evangelist 
leaves them to enter the town.
Vanity Fair is a place where all the empty pleasures of life are on display to lure pilgrims into a false sense of 
eternal happiness. These pleasures appear to really satisfy, and they take many varieties. They do not present 
themselves as evil, but if we “buy” them, if they capture our hearts, they can destroy our relationship with God. 
This was exactly how the devil tempted Jesus (Matt. 4:1-11). 
Seeing that Christian and Faithful are not interested in buying what they are selling, the people of the town ar-
rest them and put them in prison. Faithful is then put on trial where several false witnesses are brought to testify 
against him. Despite their obvious folly and deceit, the witnesses are deemed credible, and the jurors decide 
against Faithful. After torturing him, he is finally executed, but Christian sees him immediately taken by chariot 
to the Celestial City. Christian is spared the same fate by God’s mysterious providence and is freed from prison. 
He then connects with Hopeful, and they continue their journey together.
Bible Reading
Ecclesiastes 2:1-11; John 3:18-21; 7:7; 15:18-21; 16:33
Memory Verse
“The Lord stood by me and strengthened me…So I was rescued from the lion’s mouth. The Lord will rescue 
me from every evil deed and bring me safely into his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. 
Amen.” (2 Timothy 4:17-18)
12
