WEEK 11: THE CELESTIAL CITY
Chapter Fifteen and Conclusion
Glossary
Beulah: A Hebrew word meaning “married” that is used to describe the beauty and glory of Zion/Jerusalem in 
Isaiah 62:1-5. Isaiah uses this term in contrast to the imagery of being forsaken or desolate (Is. 62:4; Lam. 1:1), 
which described Jerusalem during the time of the exile. 
Shining Ones: These are angels who are often described in the Bible as having “shining” or “dazzling” clothing 
(Luke 24:4). They “shine” because they have been in God’s presence and radiate His glory (Ex. 34:29-35).
Synopsis
Christian and Hopeful reach the country of Beulah near the Celestial City. After staying there a while, they are 
told that they have two remaining difficulties to overcome: they must cross the river of death and they must 
ascend the final hill to reach the gate of the City.
As they set out toward the river, Christian is initially distressed by thoughts of his former sins and all the rea-
sons why he would not be granted entrance into the City, but his friend, Hopeful, is able to touch the bottom 
of the river. Hopeful offers encouraging words to remind Christian of the kindness of the king and call to mind 
various Scriptures to fortify his faith. 
When they reach the other side of the river, they are greeted by two Shining Ones, who begin to describe to 
them the inexpressible beauty and glory of life inside the City. Finally, they come to the gate of the City. There, 
they give their certificates to the gatekeeper who gave them to the King. Then the King commands that the gates 
be open and Christian and Hopeful be granted admittance into the Celestial City.
As the gates were opened, the narrator turns to see another man, Ignorance, approaching the edge of the river. 
He tries to avoid the hardships necessary to entering the kingdom (Acts 14:22), but it is to no avail. When he is 
confronted at the gate of the City and is found without a certificate, he is thrown into hell. 
Bible Reading
Isaiah 62:1-12; 65:17-25; Revelation 21:1-22:21
Memory Verse
“And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, ‘Behold, the dwelling place of God is with man. He will 
dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God. He will wipe 
away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor 
pain anymore, for the former things have passed away.’” (Rev. 21:3-4)
22
