WEEK 4: A FIERCE BATT  LE AND A DARK VALLEY
Chapter Four
Glossary
Apollyon: Used in Revelation 9:11, the name literally means “Destroyer.” In context, he is the “angel of the 
bottomless pit” and “the king” over the locusts of the fifth trumpet (Rev. 9:1-11).
Fiend: An enemy in the worst sense; the devil; an infernal being (Webster’s Dictionary, 1828).
Synopsis
The Valley of Humiliation presents Christian’s biggest challenge yet—a face to face confrontation with the devil 
himself. While the devil is depicted as a hideous monster (scales like fish, wings like a dragon, etc.), his tactics 
don’t begin with physical assault, but with spiritual attacks, with lies to deceive Christian (Eph. 6:12). Only 
when Christian has resisted the repeated spiritual attacks does Bunyan illustrate those spiritual attacks with the 
allegory of flaming darts (Eph. 6:16). 
From one valley to another, Christian then passes through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, which, for 
Bunyan, represents the precipice of hell itself. It is a disturbing combination of sights and sounds, including 
the whispering of lies that tempt Christian to shrink back in his journey. But then he hears the words of Psalm 
23 from which the valley takes its name, and they are a great comfort to him (Ps. 23:4). In these words, he 
“believed that someone who feared God was in the valley with him” and “he perceived that God was with this 
person…even though it was dark and dismal” (p. 97). 
There is something telling about Christian’s journey of passing from one valley to another. Often, as evangeli-
cals, we can seek “spiritual highs,” in which our passion for God is coupled with positive emotions (joy, relief, 
even ecstasy). However, as Bunyan makes clear, faithfulness to the King is often coupled with circumstances 
that produce negative emotions (adrenaline-induced anxiety, fear, confusion). We must remember in the midst 
of the valleys that the King of the Highway is always with us (Is. 35).
Bible Reading
Ephesians 6:11-18; 1 Peter 5:6-11
Memory Verse
“Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. For we do not 
wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over 
this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.” (Ephesians 6:11-12)
8
