WEEK 7: TEMPTED BY THE WORLD
Chapters Eight and Nine
Glossary
By-ends: A term meaning “selfish motive,” which carries the connotation of a hidden or deceitful selfishness.
Demas: A professing Christian and one of Paul’s co-workers in ministry (Col. 4:14; Phlm. 24) who abandoned 
Paul because he was in love with the world (2 Tim. 4:10).
Synopsis
Christian and Hopeful escape from Vanity Fair and continue their journey until they encounter a man named 
By-ends. This man is a fair-weather Christian, or what we might often call a “Cultural Christian.” When it is 
socially or materially advantageous to be a Christian, he plays the part to gain that advantage. When it is not 
advantageous, he distances himself from Christ. 
The company he keeps reveals the deceitful motives in his heart: Mr. Money-love, Mr. Hold-the-world, and Mr. 
Save-all. These men conspire with him to try to deceive Christian and Hopeful to fall in love with the world and 
follow their path. While their arguments may at first seem plausible (p. 146-147), Christian is so steeped in the 
Scriptures that he resists them and strengthens Hopeful as well, since Hopeful was more childish in his faith 
(Eph. 4:14). 
This vulnerability of Hopeful’s is put to the test once again as they next encounter Demas, who was every bit as 
in love with the world as By-ends and his friends. Demas tries to persuade the pilgrims to enter a silver mine, 
but Christian resists this temptation as well and builds discernment and courage into Hopeful once again. Final-
ly, they reach a river called “The River of God” or “The River of the Water of Life.” This is a wonderful place, 
and they find great refreshment after dealing with such a powerful series of temptations.
Bible Reading
Matthew 6:19-24; 13:22; 16:24-26; 19:16-30
Memory Verse
“If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. For whoever would 
save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. For what will it profit a man if he 
gains the whole world and forfeits his soul? Or what shall a man give in return for his soul?” (Matt. 16:24-26)
14
