WEEK 8: DESPAIR AND DIRECTION
Chapters Ten and Eleven
Glossary
Despair: The complete loss or absence of hope.
Delectable: Highly pleasing, delightful.
Ananias and Sapphira: Early Christians who fell dead after withholding money and lying about it (Acts 5).
Synopsis
After a difficult stretch of path, Christian persuades Hopeful to leave the path for an apparently easier way 
called By-Path Meadow. On the By-Path, they see a man named Vain-Confidence fall into a pit, indicating to 
them the folly of leaving the path. Though they regret their decision and resolve to head back to the path, they 
fall asleep. They are discovered by the Giant Despair who imprisons them in the dungeon of his castle. The Gi-
ant beats them mercilessly for a few days. Then, prompted by his wife, Distrust, he tells them to take their own 
lives rather than face a life of pain and suffering. As Christian considers this option (Job 7:15), Hopeful bolsters 
his resolve by reminding him that God is in ultimate control and their circumstances may change. He also re-
minds him of the difficult obstacles God has already brought him through on his journey. After prayer, Christian 
remembers he has a key called Promise (1 Cor. 1:8), that they can use to escape. They return to the path and put 
up a sign warning future pilgrims.
Christian and Hopeful continue until they reach the Delectable Mountains, a rich tapestry of vineyards, or-
chards, and gardens. There, the two pilgrims rest from their trials and seek guidance about the remainder of their 
journey from the shepherds there—Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, and Sincere. The shepherds take the two 
up to mountain vantage points where they point out pitfalls that other pilgrims have faced (including the Giant’s 
castle) and allow them to view the Celestial City ahead through their telescope (though the view is imperfect).  
Finally, they leave Christian and Hopeful with a map of the way and instruction to beware of the Flatterer and 
not to sleep on the Enchanted Ground. 
Bible Reading
Job 7:12-8:6, Hebrews 13:2, 13:17
Memory Verse
“Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they are keeping watch over your souls, as those who will have to 
give an account.  Let them do this with joy and not with groaning, for that would be of no advantage to you.” 
(Hebrews 13:17)
16
