WEEK ONE: PILGRIM’S GREAT DISTRESS
Chapter One
Glossary
Pliable: Easily influenced.
Obstinate: Stubborn refusal to change.
Despond: A state of unhappiness or low spirits.
Synopsis
A man named Christian is front and center as the book opens. He is greatly distressed because of the book he is 
reading and the burden he is carrying. The book has revealed to him that the city in which he and his family are 
living (the City of Destruction) is going to be destroyed, burned with fire from heaven. His distress is only am-
plified by the unbelief of his family who think he has lost his mind. In the heat of this crisis, he cries out repeat-
edly, “What shall I do to be saved?” (Acts 16:30). Eventually, he meets a man named Evangelist who points him 
in the direction of the narrow gate (Matt. 7:13-14) and sends him on his way. 
Along the road, he is chased down by two other citizens of the City of Destruction named Pliable and Obstinate. 
They try to persuade Christian to come back with them. Obstinate, seeing that they are not getting anywhere, 
returns alone to the city, but Pliable agrees to go a little farther. As they travel together, Christian shares from his 
book about the infinite happiness that is to come in the Celestial City. 
Soon, however, they fall into a swamp called Despond. Experiencing this unhappiness leads Pliable to return to 
the City of Destruction leaving Christian alone. Just then, a man named Help comes to help Christian out of the 
swamp. It is revealed to Christian that the swamp is the conscience of the sinner who has been awakened to his 
condition but is trapped in all kinds of doubts, fears, and anxieties and cannot find firm footing on the promises 
of God. Just as Christian prepares to resume his journey, he is assured by Help, “once you go through the nar-
row gate, the ground is good.”
Bible Reading
Hebrews 9:27-28; 11:8-16
Memory Verse 
“For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul 
and of spirit, of joints and of marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart.” (Hebrews 4:12)
2
