WEEK 9: CORRECTING THE DECEIVED
Chapters Twelve and Thirteen
Glossary
Apostasy: The abandonment or renunciation of faith.
Conceit: Excessive pride in oneself.
Synopsis
Christian and Hopeful leave the Delectable Mountains and meet a man named Ignorance who had not entered 
the path through the narrow gate but rather a crooked lane coming from the town of Conceit. Ignorance tells 
Christian and Hopeful that his way is acceptable, but they conclude that he is too “wise in his own eyes” (Prov. 
26:12). They determine to go on ahead without further discussion with him. After seeing Turn-Away from the 
town of Apostasy being carried away by demons, Christian recalls the story of Little-Faith, who, though he was 
robbed, refused to give up his certificate to the Celestial City. Though he offered little resistance in the fight, 
the Lord enabled him to keep his certificate to the end (2 Tim. 1:14). Hopeful contrasts this with Esau selling 
his birthright (Gen. 25:32). They conclude that though it may seem to them Little-Faith could have fought his 
attackers more courageously, they should be slow to presume how they would respond in facing another’s trial, 
and that it is ultimately the Lord’s grace that would carry them through rather than their own doing.
Coming upon a fork in the path, Christian and Hopeful are deceived into following one recommended by a man 
called a Flatterer, only to be led into a net in which they are entangled (Prov. 29:5).  The Shining One releases 
them with an admonition for not using the map given to them by the shepherds. He rebukes them corporally, 
which they humbly accept. As they continue, they meet Atheist, who claims the Celestial City doesn’t exist at 
all. He tells them he searched for it for years in vain, using this to try to persuade Christian and Hopeful. Learn-
ing from their recent oversights, they swiftly reject him as a Flatterer not to be listened to (Eccl. 10:15).  As 
they continue to face challenges, they remember the shepherds’ warnings and resolve to bolster each other with 
conversation. Hopeful shares with Christian his progress of gradually being awoken to the gravity of his sin and 
need for a Savior to justify him.  Though it was not an instant or linear growth, he ultimately accepted Christ.
Bible Reading
John 10:27-30, 2 Corinthians 11:3-4, 11:12-15
Memory Verse
“Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and do not lean on your own understanding. In all your ways acknowl-
edge him, and he will make straight your paths.  Be not wise in your own eyes; fear the Lord and turn away 
from evil. It will be healing to your flesh and refreshment to your bones.” (Proverbs 3:5-8)
18
