WEEK 2: THE NARROW GATE AND 
THE HOUSE OF THE INTERPRETER
Chapter Two
Glossary
Carnal: Pertaining to the flesh; a natural/unregenerate state.
Beelzebub: A demon who was one of the gods of the Philistines (2 Kings 1:2-3). Beelzebul, also a name for a 
demon, is used for Satan himself, the prince of demons (Matt. 12:24, 27).
Legalism: The belief that our good works can earn God’s grace. This belief exists in both fundamentalism as 
well as prosperity gospel teaching.
Synopsis
As Christian continues on his journey, weary from the burden he is carrying on his back, he encounters Mr. 
Worldly-Wiseman. This man represents those who preach a message of morality—that we just need to be good 
in order to receive God’s blessing. He persuades Christian that if he wants to get rid of his burden, he should 
leave the difficult path that Evangelist has directed him on and go instead to a place called Morality. Once he 
arrives, Christian is terrified by the prospect of trying to keep the Law in order to please God (Heb. 12:18-21) 
and realizes he should have stayed on the path Evangelist had set him on. 
Evangelist finally catches up to Christian and explains his error. He has forsaken the good path in order to 
follow a supposedly easier path that really only leads to death. Christian, with a contrite heart, expresses sorrow 
over his sin and asks for forgiveness. Evangelist assures him that he is forgiven and tells him to resume his jour-
ney to the Narrow Gate. At the Narrow Gate, Christian is greeted by Good-Will who assures him of the love of 
Christ for sinners (John 6:37). After giving him this assurance, he sends him on to the House of the Interpreter.
At the House of the Interpreter, Christian is given several visions to help him understand the way that is set before 
him—the insufficiency of the Law to cleanse the heart, the virtue of waiting for eternal rewards rather than tempo-
ral, the sustaining grace of Christ in the midst of Satan’s attacks, the tribulations through which he must enter the 
kingdom of God (Acts 14:22), the dangers of falling away from grace and hardening his heart toward Christ, and a 
vision of the Day of Judgment with the accompanying warning against being unprepared for that Day.
Bible Reading
Galatians 3:1-12; 4:8-11; 5:2-12; 6:1, 11-18
Memory Verse
“Enter by the narrow gate. For the gate is wide and the way is easy that leads to destruction, and those who 
enter by it are many. For the gate is narrow and the way is hard that leads to life, and those who find it are few.” 
(Matthew 7:13-14)
4
