WEEK 10: STUBBORN IGNORA  NCE
Chapter Fourteen
Glossary
Sluggard: A habitually lazy or idle person.
Backsliding: As Bunyan uses this term, it is a synonym for apostasy, referring to someone who temporarily 
showed signs of genuine faith but ultimately walks away from Christ. Today, the term can often be used of 
someone who has temporarily walked away from Christ but is believed to have genuine faith and ultimately be 
saved.
Synopsis
Christian and Hopeful observe that Ignorance continued to walk the path at a distance behind them, agreeing 
that he probably does not wish for their companionship. Christian allows him to catch up and questions him 
on how his journey is going and about his soul’s standing with God. Ignorance, trusting in his own heart as the 
source of absolute truth, states that he is “full of good thoughts and intentions,” but a skeptical Christian pursues 
what he means by “good thoughts.” Christian states that good thoughts about ourselves are those that agree with 
the Word of God in affirming our sinful nature (Rom. 3:10-12), and that good thoughts about God are those that 
agree with what He says about Himself. Like many today, Ignorance reveals to Christian and Hopeful that he 
could never believe that his heart is “that bad” (Jer. 17:9). He cannot come to grips with his own sinfulness and 
need for a Savior. 
Taking leave of Ignorance, Christian and Hopeful discuss the nature of those like him who fail to acknowledge 
the weight of their sin. Christian describes their lack, or stifling, of a productive fear of God.  They then discuss 
the reasons those who had once shown an awareness of sin and desire to undertake the pilgrimage may back-
slide, using the example of a man they knew named Temporary. This discussion concludes Bunyan’s develop-
ment in this chapter of the various ways those that claim to have faith can show that they are missing a crucial 
element, be it the acknowledgement of the weight of sin, having a “true or right fear” of God, or true repen-
tance.
Bible Reading
Jeremiah 17:9-10; 2 Peter 2:20-22, Romans 7:18-25
Memory Verse
“All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father, and no one 
knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.” (Matthew 11:27)
20
