THE PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 
STUDY GUIDE
Introduction
Greetings, Pilgrims! The book we are setting out to read and discuss together is one of the most famous in the 
English language. It has been in print continuously since its first publication in 1678—345 years ago! Gener-
ation after generation have found in this story of Christian’s journey to the Celestial City a mirror to their own 
experience of walking with God in this world. After all, everyone who has made Jesus their King is “looking 
forward to the city that has foundations, whose designer and builder is God” (Heb. 11:10). 
The original full title of the book is The Pilgrim’s Progress from This World to That Which Is to Come. While 
the storyline focuses a great deal on the trials and tribulations through which every Christian must travel in this 
life, there is no doubt that the emphasis is on what is to come. It is the hope that Christian has set before him 
that enables him to endure such trials. Though his journey is dangerous, his great desire—the thing that keeps 
him going—is to please the King and to arrive safely in His heavenly kingdom.
Part of what gives Bunyan’s work such power are the circumstances in which he wrote it. He was a Baptist at 
a time when it was illegal to be one. It was illegal to worship God in good conscience according to one’s own 
understanding of the Scriptures. Under the reign of King Charles II of England, he was imprisoned in Bedford 
County Jail for twelve years. It was during this time that he wrote the book. He alludes to this in the opening 
lines. The “den” or “cave” in which he says he laid down to rest, according to his own margin note, is the jail.
So, as we approach this study together, we should have a deep appreciation for those who have gone before us 
in the Christian life. The circumstances of our trials might be different, but the spiritual dynamics are very much 
the same. We have our own temptations to despair, to doubt, to be enamored with the things of this world, to 
lose sight of our great prize—the upward call of God in Christ Jesus (Phil. 3:14). 
May this study help us to renew our commitment to Christ in this life, to awaken us to the real spiritual dangers 
within and without, and to cause us to persevere in faith until we reach the desired country.  
Note on the Study Guide
Each study will have a glossary for unfamiliar terms, a synopsis of the chapter(s), Scripture passages to read 
together, questions for reflection and discussion, and memory verses. Many of the questions have been adapted 
from The Pilgrim’s Progress Discipleship Course by Cheryl Ford and The Pilgrim’s Progress: A Guided Tour by 
Derek Thomas. If you are joining a group for discussion, make sure to work through the questions in advance, 
so as to make the most of your time together. Also, make sure to familiarize yourselves with the Scripture refer-
ences in each chapter. The value of a Christian book is found in the ways that it illumines and applies the Scrip-
tures. We pray no one loses sight of that as we get into this story together. 
