WEEK 5: A FAITHFUL BROTHER
Chapters Five and Six
Glossary
Wanton: Wandering from moral rectitude, indulging in sensuality without restraint.
Deceit: The act of causing someone to accept as true or valid what is false or invalid.
Prating: Talking foolishly or at tedious length about something (Talkative lives at Prating Row).
Synopsis
After passing through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, Christian meets a fellow pilgrim from his town named 
Faithful, who informs him of the reaction to his departure in their town. The people initially considered their 
impending doom, but ultimately rejected that recognition in favor of mocking Christian’s undertaking. Faith-
ful then recounts his own journey, revealing that he encountered different obstacles. While he did not fall into 
the Swamp of Despond, he was tempted by Wanton with “carnal and fleshly pleasures.” He had no difficulties 
passing through the Valleys of Humiliation and Shadow of Death that so troubled Christian, but he had been 
harassed by a man named Shame who persistently argued the foolishness of his journey. Through their sharing 
of stories, Bunyan demonstrates that while the basic outline of the Christian life is common to all, the particular 
obstacles we face as individuals will differ. 
Christian and Faithful then encounter a third man from their city named Talkative. Faithful initially expresses 
excitement about their new companion, but Christian informs him that Talkative’s appearance is deceptive. 
Christian knows from their town that Talkative is a rude man at home who cheats people in financial dealings 
and will talk just as enthusiastically about nonsense while drinking in the pub. We must understand as Christians 
that “saying and doing are two different things” (James 1:22-27). Faithful then approaches Talkative to question 
whether his actions reflect the truth of his words. Talkative becomes defensive and refuses to engage any longer. 
The two “sincere pilgrims” depart from him, and Christian commends Faithful for dealing with Talkative so 
directly, rather than passively accepting him.
Bible Reading
Mark 8:35-38, James 1:22-27, Ephesians 5:6-17
Memory Verse
“Let no one deceive you with empty words…Walk as children of light (for the fruit of light is found in all that is 
good and right and true) and try to discern what is pleasing to the Lord. Take no part in the unfruitful works of 
darkness, but instead expose them.” (Ephesians 5:6, 8-11)
10
