WEEK 3: THE CROSS, THE HILL OF DIFFICULTY, 
AND THE HOUSE BEAUTIFUL
Chapter Three
Glossary
Sloth: Not inclined to be active or work; sluggish.
Timorous: Fearful; timid; lacking courage.
Prudence: Wisdom applied to practice.
Piety: Reverence for God that works itself out in obedience.
Synopsis
Having been equipped at the House of the Interpreter, Christian now comes to a climactic moment at the cross, 
where he finally loses his burden once and for all. Despite this glorious experience of relief, the moment quickly 
passes and Christian returns to his journey. The transition is accentuated as he comes almost immediately to the 
Hill of Difficulty. There is a lot for us to learn as redeemed people living in a fallen world from the timing and 
sequence of Christian’s experience here.
The Hill of Difficulty presents such a challenge to pilgrims that it leaves those who are not whole-heartedly devot-
ed to the King (like Formalist and Hypocrisy) seeking alternate routes that do not lead to eternal life. But though 
it is difficult, Christian gives his full effort to making the climb. He finally reaches an arbor where he stops to rest, 
but his rest turns into indulgent sleep. After being awoken with a fright, he moves quickly to resume his journey 
but forgets his scroll at the arbor. Thankfully, he is able to retrace his steps and recover the scroll.
Finally, he arrives at the House Beautiful, which represents the fellowship of the church. Bunyan is highlighting 
how the church is a gift to us for “the relief and security of pilgrims” (p. 72). After being interviewed by one 
of the virgins of the house (Rev. 14:4), Christian is granted entry into the house and finds himself enjoying the 
company of the other residents—Prudence, Piety, and Charity. He reflects on the journey thus far and is able to 
rest for a few days. Before his departure, they equip Christian with armor from the Lord’s armory, everything 
necessary for the journey that yet lies ahead of him.
Bible Reading
Ephesians 2:13-22; 3:20-21; 4:11-16; 6:11-18
Memory Verse
“Take care, brothers, lest there be in any of you an evil, unbelieving heart, leading you to fall away from the 
living God. But exhort one another every day, as long as it is called ‘today,’ that none of you may be hardened 
by the deceitfulness of sin. For we have come to share in Christ, if indeed we hold our original confidence firm 
to the end.” (Hebrews 3:12-14)
6
