      I. The question they had to propose to him: Art thou he that
should come, or do we look for another? This was a serious and important
question; Art thou the Messiah promised, or not? Art thou the Christ?
Tell us. 1. It is taken for granted that the Messiah should come. It was
one of the names by which he was known to the Old-Testament saints, he
that cometh or shall come, Ps. cxviii. 26. He is now come, but there is
another coming of his which we still expect. 2. They intimate, that if
this be not he, they would look for another. Note, We must not be weary
of looking for him that is to come, nor ever say, we will not more
expect him till we come to enjoy him. Though he tarry, wait for him, for
he that shall come will come, though not in our time. 3. They intimate
likewise, that if they be convinced that this is he, they will not be
sceptics, they will be satisfied, and will look for no other. 4. They
therefore ask, Art thou he? John had said for his part, I am not the
Christ, John i. 20. Now, (1.) Some think that John sent this question
for his own satisfaction. It is true he had borne a noble testimony to
Christ; he had declared him to be the Son of God (John i. 34), the Lamb
of God (v. 29), and he that should baptize with the Holy Ghost (v. 33),
and sent of God (John iii. 34), which were great things. But he desired
to be further and more fully assured, that he was the Messiah that had
been so long promised and expected. Note, In matters relating to Christ
and our salvation by him, it is good to be sure. Christ appeared not in
that external pomp and power in which it was expected he should appear;
his own disciples stumbled at this, and perhaps John did so; Christ saw
something of this at the bottom of this enquiry, when he said, blessed
is he who shall not be offended in me. Note, It is hard, even for good
men, to bear up against vulgar errors. (2.) John's doubt might arise
from his own present circumstances. He was a prisoner, and might be
tempted to think, if Jesus be indeed the Messiah, whence is it that I,
his friend and forerunner, am brought into this trouble, and am left to
be so long in it, and he never looks after me, never visits me, nor
sends to me, enquires not after me, does nothing either to sweeten my
imprisonment or hasten my enlargement? Doubtless there was a good reason
why our Lord Jesus did not go to John in prison, lest there should seem
to have been a compact between them: but John construed it into a
neglect, and it was perhaps a shock to his faith in Christ. Note, [1.]
Where there is true faith, yet there may be a mixture of unbelief. The
best are not always alike strong. [2.] Troubles for Christ, especially
when they continue long unrelieved, are such trials of faith as
sometimes prove too hard to be borne up against. [3.] The remaining
unbelief of good men may sometimes, in an hour of temptation, strike at
the root, and call in question the most fundamental truths which were
thought to be well settled. Will the Lord cast off for ever? But we will
hope that John's faith did not fail in this matter, only he desired to
have it strengthened and confirmed. Note, The best saints have need of
the best helps they can get for the strengthening of their faith, and
the arming of themselves against temptations to infidelity. Abraham
believed, and yet desired a sign (Gen. xv. 6, 8), so did Gideon, Judg.
vi. 36. But, (3.) Others think that John sent his disciples to Christ
with this question, not so much for his own satisfaction as for theirs.
Observe, Though he was a prisoner they adhered to him, attended on him,
and were ready to receive instructions from him; they loved him, and
would not leave him. Now, [1.] They were weak in knowledge, and wavering
in their faith, and needed instruction and confirmation; and in this
matter they were somewhat prejudiced; being jealous for their master,
they were jealous of our Master; they were loth to acknowledge Jesus to
be the Messiah, because he eclipsed John, and are loth to believe their
own master when they think he speaks against himself and them. Good men
are apt to have their judgments blessed by their interest. Now John
would have their mistakes rectified, and wished them to be as well
satisfied as he himself was. Note, The strong ought to consider the
infirmities of the weak, and to do what they can to help them: and such
as we cannot help ourselves we should send to those that can. When thou
art converted, strengthen thy brethren. [2.] John was all along
industrious to turn over his disciples to Christ, as from the
grammar-school to the academy. Perhaps he foresaw his death approaching,
and therefore would bring his disciples to be better acquainted with
Christ, under whose guardianship he must leave them. Note, Ministers'
business is to direct every body to Christ. And those who would know the
certainty of the doctrine of Christ, must apply themselves to him, who
is come to give an understanding. They who would grow in grace must be
inquisitive.

