# Sports Injury
# ============================================================

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

eeoeeeeeeeeé

Medicine

We were living in a time of almost unbelievable ignorance about heart disease.

—Paul Dudley White

DAVE CAME FROM the Navy SEALs, and rode a worn-out Pee Wee Herman-type bicycle through terrible weather in the wrong gear. Magna cum
laude at Pitt, Albert had led a research project involving bunny-rabbit bone grafts. Together with their Harvard Medical School roommate, Marcus

Elliott, they lived across the street from the Brookline Reservoir, where they swam, against the rules, even in the dead of winter. Biking to campus

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

on garage sale bikes became a ritual, a spiritual practice, and an identity. In the worst winter storms, classmates cheered as they pulled in, “then
you'd rip off all your gear like Superman, and underneath you're a doctor,” says Albert.

One icy-cold morning, Marcus bellowed his “soowee” war cry as he ripped across the frozen surface of the Charles River. The conventional
wisdom is never to walk, let alone bike, on a frozen river, but Marcus and Albert were not conventional.

“We took it on,” explains Marcus. “I’m not claiming it was smart, but that was a special thing.”

Fast bikes crash hard. “Like a banana peel,” remembers Marcus, of the river’s sheet of ice, covered in a new blanket of snow. “The ground
slipped out. I fell pretty hard.”

In its tumble, Marcus’s body wiped the snow clean off the river’s surface. Face down, Marcus got his first good look at the surface. Trouble.
He’d been expecting six inches of ice, hoping for ten. This looked like . .. two? “I could see leaves and things traveling in the river,” Marcus says.
“Tt put some fear into me.”

The water ran close. And fast. Marcus remembers thinking that if he fell through, he’d have to grip the ice edge for dear life.

Crawl away? Run? Scream? Panic? Marcus... did physics. He remembers “some calculations.” If he weighs 185 pounds and his bike is 30
and he crashes at 27 miles an hour, how much force would he generate? He considered the air temperature, water temperature, and thermal con-
duction. If the ice is two and a half inches thick, what force could it withstand?

Humans have been playing, exerting, and thrill-seeking essentially forever. Some of the oldest known human creations are cave paintings,
and from Mongolia’s Bayankhongor Province to France’s Lascaux, they depict, among other things, sports.

And injury. Half a millennium before Christ, Hippocrates, the “Father of Medicine,” said “health is at risk when exercise is at very high
levels.”

So, it might be a little surprising to learn that, while sports are ancient, sports medicine is, by comparison, a newborn. Taping ankles only
became commonplace thanks to a man who died in 1986.

An extraordinary high school athlete, Augustus Thorndike made the papers in 1915 for dominating a high school track meet by winning
the forty-yard dash, three-hundred-yard run, and twelve-pound shot put. Thorndike joined the Harvard football team but only played a short
while before World War I drew him to the navy, after which he followed in his father’s footsteps and became an orthopedic surgeon. Eventually,
Thorndike was appointed chief of surgery for Harvard’s health services, with residencies at seemingly every prominent institution in greater
Boston.

In the early 1930s, a Harvard administrator asked Thorndike to look after the hockey team; other sports quickly followed. Thorndike

served in two world wars and earned a Legion of Merit from the Pentagon—but it was his work on the football sidelines that made headlines.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Athletes today take for granted a level of care that Thorndike invented. He resolved that doctors, and not coaches, should determine who’s
fit to play. He arranged for an X-ray machine near the field. He banned any player who’d been knocked out cold three times. He told football
players to grow their hair long for extra protection inside the helmet. Thorndike became, reportedly, the first doctor to design protective gear for
football players, and wrote a pioneering book on athletic injuries, and another on taping and bandaging.

Perhaps Thorndike’s biggest innovation, however, was to be present during the game. In 1940, Time magazine reported that when the
Harvard football team took the field, a “heavyset, long-haired doctor stands on the sidelines, ready to rush on the field.” Nearby, he positioned a
dentist; a neurosurgeon; an ear, nose, and throat specialist; and an internal medicine doctor. When Thorndike ran out with his black doctor’s bag,
he could summon any of these specialists with hand signals. Eventually, he created a special class at Harvard Medical School for third-year surgi-
cal students, called Surgery 34. It typically comprised eight students who patrolled the sidelines of Harvard’s other sports.

In one incident a football player named Charley Speyer took a shot to the head and began using nonsense hand signals. A Harvard
teammate recognized the signals from years earlier, when they had been teammates at Choate boarding school. In other words, the collision had
knocked his brain back a few years. After this, Thorndike recruited and empowered team captains to keep an eye on players, and to make it known
if anyone seemed off.

Thorndike concocted a robust program to count and study injuries. Time describes one of his medical journal articles as “a meaty chronicle

of sprains, strains, ruptures of the spinal column and spleen, fractures of the skull, collapses of the lungs” that “might persuade a casual reader
that a sports doctor’s life is a gory one.”

In the waning years of his career, Thorndike shifted focus. The future would be less about running on the field with a black bag, and more
about preventing injuries in the first place. In 1956, Thorndike published an article in the Journal of the American Medical Association that opened
with the observation that nine players died during the 1955 football season, a problem he wanted to address with data collection. “A preventive
program,” he wrote, “must include a thorough preseason physical examination, with special emphasis on the history of prior injuries that the
examinee might try to hide. There should then follow a period of physical conditioning under close medical observation, no matter what the
sport or competition.”

Paul Dudley White, MD, a Harvard contemporary of Thorndike’s, was similarly upending cardiology. White’s medical journey began in
childhood, when his sister Dorothy lost her life to heart problems. After decades of mapping the underlying dynamics of heart attacks, White

convinced the world that the best time to treat heart attacks was before they occurred.
Speaking at Harvard Medical School’s graduation in 1956, White said cardiology had traditionally been completely irrational. Heart

problems had been seen as acts of God, vengeance, or bad luck. In Roman times, Galen was the expert, but he worked largely with pig cadavers

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

and made erroneous conclusions—for instance, that blood originated in the liver. Early practitioners puzzled for years over whether arteries
connected to vessels. In 1707, the pope’s physician, Joannis Maria Lancisi of Rome, felt compelled to write a whole book dispelling the myth that
prominent Romans had been struck down by a spiteful deity.

Robust science began to arrive with that little beepy machine next to the hospital bed: the echocardiogram. Dutch doctor and physiologist

Willem Einthoven won a Nobel Prize in 1924 for perfecting the machine. A decade prior, White had traveled by steamship to London to observe
the emerging technology. Even though he served overseas in World War I, White conducted more than 20,000 echocardiograms between 1914
and 1931.

With this tool, cardiology could finally see that movement was the thing; the flow of blood (or not) through the dollhouse plumbing of the
human heart determined whether the organ continued to pump. The machine had flicked the lights on in a dark room. White’s thousand-page
1931 textbook Heart Disease quickly became a standard, and is still in use today. “Virtually singlehandedly,” writes the New York Times, “Dr. White
laid the foundation for today’s American cardiology.”

White made news by opening a bike path in Chicago and pedaling across the macadam of Martha’s Vineyard to demonstrate the import-

ance of exercise. “Death from a heart attack before the age of 80 is not God’s will,” White said, “it is man’s will.”

In August 1955, President Dwight D. Eisenhower flew to Colorado for a couple of months of work at the “White House West.” One night he
went to bed early, felt sick, and woke up with chest pains, which his doctor treated with painkillers. Later that day, an echocardiogram discovered
a heart attack, and the Secret Service whisked the president to Fitzsimons Army Hospital.

Newspapers compared the ensuing uproar to Pearl Harbor. They summoned White, who arrived by military plane and examined the
president in fine detail. With a flight waiting to take White back East, he lingered before the White House press corps. He had dedicated his life to
spreading his message about heart health. Why waste the world’s attention?

That day, White gave what, decades later, in the New England Journal of Medicine, Thomas H. Lee, MD, suggested was the most consequen-
tial press conference in history. “He spoke to the press, and by extension the public, as if they were medical students interested in understanding

the heart and myocardial infarction. He explained how heart attacks were caused by the buildup of atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries and
the formation of blood clots that blocked the vessels. He described how the damage was repaired the same way that cuts on the skin healed.”
Family history, gender, age, and build probably all play a part, White said, “and there are a number of other factors that we are not sure
about that are environmental, which include activity, occupation, stress and strain, diet, and customs, local customs, use of tobacco, alcohol, and
soon... probably some of you in this room have coronary artery disease and don’t know it.” White became a media favorite. Press secretary Jim

Hagerty said that reporters told him it was the best press conference they’d ever attended.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

White followed up with President Eisenhower every couple of weeks. Each visit produced front-page news.

“The editor of an antismoking newsletter wrote him that nothing published by any association had had impact comparable to what he
had accomplished that day,” writes Lee. “Heart attacks became less mysterious and less frightening to millions of Americans... White gave them
the message that they could take steps to reduce their risk.”

White's prescription for Eisenhower included riding his bicycle, which seemed outlandish at the time. In the years that followed, the
medical profession made, as White put it, “adequate study” of the problem and determined the underlying factors of heart disease: high blood
pressure, high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, diabetes, smoking and secondhand smoke exposure, obesity, unhealthy diet, and physical in-
activity. Treating heart attacks by preventing them became the standard of care, with doctors recommending improvements in diet and exercise,
as well as blood tests for risk factors, anti-smoking efforts, and early diabetes intervention. At the time of Eisenhower’s heart attack, Americans
lived, on average, to sixty-eight. The death rate from heart disease was 588 per 100,000. Heart disease has fallen every decade since, to, the CDC
says, 162 per 100,000 in 2019—a 72 percent decline. It’s seen as one of the most successful medical interventions of all time, with the results

measured in millions of life years. Americans now live, on average, a decade longer.

The names Thorndike and White were legendary at Harvard Medical School when Marcus and his roommates arrived. Their work had
been transformative and brought glory to the Cambridge campus and Boston-area hospitals. But in Marcus’s view, Harvard Medical School itself
did not always reflect their maverick brilliance. He found the institution militaristic, hierarchical, and at times antithetical to much of what he
wanted to do. “One week you’re cutting open somebody’s stomach,” he says, “the next week you’re in a psych ward, then after that you deliver
a baby.” All the while, Marcus dreamt of movement: mountaineering, surfing, or trail runs. If he had forty free minutes, he would bound up the
hospital stairwell in scrubs. If his pager went off, he’d see patients while dripping sweat.

Harvard students get a big dose of medical history. But medical history, Marcus says, was mostly misadventure. “We just kind of stumble
along in medicine,” he says. “In Victorian England, it’s well documented that the wealthy died at a much younger age than regular people, because
the practitioners were applying too much medicine. Too much bleeding, too many leeches, too much arsenic.” The practice of medicine has been
around almost forever, but Marcus notes that only around World War II did the field show a measurable impact on health.

“I learned to be really grilled in the scientific method,” says Marcus. “You have a hypothesis, you collect data around it, and you see which
direction the data takes you.” That’s what White brought to cardiology, and what Thorndike thought was missing from sports. “The obvious
thing that was missing was applying the scientific method to musculoskeletal health,” Marcus says. “At that time, it was just not how it was done.
And it’s generally still not how it’s done.”

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Just as White found clues in the movement of a heart years before a heart attack, Marcus wanted to examine the movement of ankles,
knees, and hips in the years before an ACL tear, an Achilles rupture, or a blown-out back.

As he lay on the frozen Charles that morning, Marcus used physics to assess the impact forces. His calculations revealed what everyone else
had known without calculations: it was dumb to ride a bike on that frozen river. Marcus and Albert padded gingerly to the river’s edge, then rode

the rest of the way to school on a bike path named after Paul Dudley White.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

IN

Free-Range

Always be on the lookout for the presence of wonder.

—E. B. White

WHEN BERA LISLE Woopy died in 2003, her obituary said she was born in Coal County, Oklahoma, in 1917, moved to Arkansas, where her

husband owned a general store, and worshipped at the Church of Christ.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

It did not mention that her son Gaius T. Woody did “peyote for five days straight with this old Mexican guy down in the desert,” according
to her grandson Marcus. “Totally changed his life course.”

“Next thing you know,” Marcus says, “he’s living in Big Sur, out of a yurt, and carving pieces of wood that he found. He became a beatnik,
hanging out in San Francisco.” Gaius married a woman named Rochelle; their three children grew up as free as wild ponies.

Many kids in the 1970s roamed around Bolinas, a hidden surfing town an hour north of San Francisco not many years or miles removed
from the acid tests of Haight-Ashbury. But Leah, Marcus, and Jenna had it better. With their house rented to tourists for extra cash, the family
spent entire summers under the scrub trees on the hard sand on the edge of town, living in a Steinbeck novel. They cooked over wood flames, fell
asleep in cots, breathed noisy sea air, and woke to sunbeams.

Sometimes Gaius would put Marcus on his shoulders and amble out onto the reef with cheap fishing rods. They knew how to keep their
shadows from frightening the rockfish and when the halibut would bite. “We’d outfish all these rich guys with their killer equipment,” remem-
bers Marcus. He liked returning with dinner. He loved outthinking the rich guys.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Then Gaius met Russel V. A. Lee. It turned out that, in addition to being a forward-thinking doctor, a founder of the Stanford Medical
School, and a big-time real estate investor, Lee was an art collector. He offered the Elliotts rent-free living on property he owned in the Dry Creek
Valley, which cuts through Sonoma County’s stunning Mayacamas Mountains with features like Frog Woman Rock and Panther Ridge. Instead of
money, Lee wanted a right of first refusal to purchase Gaius’s work.

But Gaius didn’t take the deal. It didn’t sit right to live in someone’s house without paying. So, he bartered: the Elliotts would pay fifty
dollars a month for the six-hundred-acre property in Preston.

Now the Elliott-Woody children (Marcus would later drop the “Woody”) roamed over six hundred acres of black walnut, chokecherry,
laurel, and dogwood. The land had a house, a spring, a giant fig tree, a lake, and a barn for sculpture. Marcus taught himself to throw walnuts so
they’d hit any branch you pointed at, how to ride a contentious pig, how to solo camp on a rocky ridge a day’s walk away, and how to launch his
body from the branches of the fig tree into the cold water below. On hot days, Marcus would gallop on a horse with his husky, Casey, trailing them
across the crunchy dry grass, to the lake a mile away. They barely slowed at the lake’s edge.

Marcus built things with Gaius. “I had my dad’s hammer. It’s super-heavy and I’m trying not to smash my fingers. I’m scared.” As they built
a treehouse, Marcus was reluctant. “Somehow it’s stuck with me so clearly, but slowly he said, ‘Marco, Marco, don’t picture hitting your hands.”

Anticipation can stifle free movement. “See the nail?” Gaius said. “Don’t think about it. Just zen it.” Marcus still has that hammer, and that
idea. Zen might be tough to define as a verb, but it was lasting advice. Getting deep into your thoughts doesn’t help you hit a nail, backflip off a
bridge over the Russian River, or hammer dunk in an NBA game.

At ten, a friend’s mom signed Marcus up for Little League baseball. Marcus had somehow lived an American decade without seeing a single
baseball game. When they asked what position he played, he said “pitcher” because it was the only one he could name.

Marcus liked the feel of the ball; his teammates loved that he could throw it hard, even if it took a few games to dial in the rules. Soon he
starred on an undefeated team, and earned a call up to the older league. Sports became a huge part of his life: baseball, football, or just about any
other outdoor thing you wanted him to do. Drives to practice and uniforms and cleats cut into his time with the horse and the dog and the pig.

Marcus’s parents encouraged him. “I started to study econ to be an investment banker. I liked the idea of wearing a three-piece suit. My

”

dad’s like, ‘Oh, that’s great, you’d be a great investment banker.” Marcus found chemistry incredibly difficult, but had some idea about becoming
a chemical engineer. “I sucked at it. And it’s like, ‘You'd be a great engineer, Marco.”

Or a football player. Marcus spent the afternoon of his seventeenth birthday at Cloverdale High football practice. “I’d just done this drill
with this kid, it was, like, a one-on-one tackling drill,” he remembers. “I juked him really hard. He was a big kid. He was bigger than me.” By then

Marcus was about six foot two and 185 pounds.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

They did the same thing again, and Marcus had an even better move. Marcus played free safety and wide receiver and had college hopes. “I
made, like, ashimmy-shimmy and went straight through him. Just like straight through him.” He demonstrates the movement. Arms out, palms
up, shoulders and hips working.

The big kid crumpled toward the ground, but caught Marcus’s leg on the way. First, his falling shoulder “pushed in” Marcus’s right leg. The
force hyperextended Marcus’s knee, which pinned him in place.

“I was just standing there with the ball,” Marcus says. Even then, Marcus was a nerd about how the body works. There are four major knee
ligaments, thought Marcus, as his teammate’s falling body began to rotate through his joint. Marcus prefers not to remember this moment, but
adds, “I remember exactly how it sounded.”

Around four o’clock on that beautiful end-of-summer afternoon, seventeen years of free movement came to an end.

The physical break caused a social one. “Everyone was showing up in my hospital room. I had flowers all over. It was full!” Marcus
remembers. Within a week, his coach had found another player to throw the ball to—one of Marcus’s best friends. Before long, Marcus’s girlfriend
was dating that guy.

“Then I was kind of forgotten,” Marcus says. “Like the world went on spinning, and I wasn’t spinning with it anymore. I wasn’t talking to
my classmates. I missed four months of school. I had a full-length cast on for four and a half months, up to my thigh.” He didn’t go to the lake, play
with the pig, nor explore the six hundred acres. “I was depressed. I didn’t know what my life was gonna be. That’s the truth. Like, it felt like, ina
seventeen-year-old way, that my life is over,” Marcus says. “I had something that was so precious to me taken away. And... andit hurt so much
for so long. There’s got to be a better way.”

Marcus read the medical journal Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. And he started thinking. If there was a technique to shimmy past
a tackler, to catch a fish, or to throw a pitch, there must be a technique to prevent this hell.

“When I came out of it, I was looking at this same whiteboard that was empty, and saying, ‘Wow.’ Sort of, also: endless potential. ‘I can go
anywhere.”

He had a project. He would study the human body and learn how to prevent injuries. Marcus says, “It’s very cliché to say, you know, ‘I’m
better for it, but I really am. I worked so much harder. I was so much clearer about where I was going.”

His parents told him he’d be great.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

JIN

eoe0oe37e#eee@ee@

Wicked

In the most devilishly wicked learning environments, experience will reinforce the exact wrong lessons.

—David Epstein

BY THE TIME Marcus got his head together, he had missed all the college application deadlines. His mom found a summer program at Berkeley
that served as a stepping stone to the University of California, Santa Barbara, just a few hours’ drive from home and, thankfully, surrounded by a

swath of preserved wildlands roughly the size of Massachusetts.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Marcus’s parents handed him what they had saved for college. The three hundred dollars fit easily into Marcus’s jeans pocket.

When he got to Santa Barbara, Marcus applied for a dozen jobs, was offered five, and took three. “I worked at a liquor store,” Marcus says. “I
worked at Straw Hat Pizza, and the New York Bagel Factory, making bagels at five in the morning.” After a feeling-out period, he quit the pizza gig
and was left with days bookended by $3.35 an hour making bagels and $3.65 selling liquor.

Time and money were tight. Marcus was on three sports teams. He attended classes. And he needed to find a way to solve the complicated
scientific mystery of sports injuries.

“There’s not, like, an easy route to make that your life’s work,” Marcus says. When he left home in the late summer of 1984, there was no
field of study dedicated to injury prevention. Marcus endeavored to catch a fish that had never been caught, and he didn’t know where to cast his
line.

About that time, a researcher at the University of Chicago named Robin Hogarth was examining how people learn. As popularized by
David Epstein in Range, Hogarth suggested that games with clear rules and hard edges, like chess and darts, make “kind” learning environments
—the dynamics of the thing become clearer as you play. Other problems, though, are “wicked” and packed with misdirection. Some problems,
Hogarth says, are as complex as “Martian tennis”—people are playing all around you, but the rules are indecipherable and change all the time.
Hogarth and his coauthors opened a 2015 article with an anecdote from a New York City doctor a century prior, who had a knack for finding
typhoid cases: “His clinical technique included palpating patients’ tongues before making his pessimistic forecasts. Unfortunately, he was invari-

ably correct.” We later learn that the doctor had typhoid, and was giving it to patients by touching their tongues.

Sports injuries have long been treated like simple problems: something would break, you'd find it on a scan, and then address it. But
Marcus wanted to do something vastly more complex: to see the injury before it happened. There wasn’t even a clear field of academic study that
might capture it. How might hidden trouble signal itself? In blood values? Diet? Sleep patterns? Neuroscience? Physical therapy? Athletic train-
ing? Pick wrong, and Marcus might spend a decade down the rabbit hole of one field, only to learn that he needed to look elsewhere.

Where on campus would Marcus find a mentor? The answer turned out to be the men’s room. Before he had taken his first undergraduate
class, Marcus stepped up to a UC Santa Barbara urinal. As he recalls, a particularly short man began peeing next to him. “I swear I’m not in the
habit of talking to strangers at urinals,” says Marcus. But there was something about that guy; Marcus struck up a conversation. “And he asked me
what I was interested in. And I told him. He goes, ‘Well, that’s what I do.”

That’s how Marcus met legendary sports physiologist Steven Horvath. Marcus loved listening to Horvath, who often gave Marcus rides in

his convertible Cadillac, smoking cigars and dropping pearls of knowledge about everything from interracial relationships (Horvath was in one)

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Marcus’s parents handed him what they had saved for college. The three hundred dollars fit easily into Marcus’s jeans pocket.

When he got to Santa Barbara, Marcus applied for a dozen jobs, was offered five, and took three. “I worked at a liquor store,” Marcus says. “I
worked at Straw Hat Pizza, and the New York Bagel Factory, making bagels at five in the morning.” After a feeling-out period, he quit the pizza gig
and was left with days bookended by $3.35 an hour making bagels and $3.65 selling liquor.

Time and money were tight. Marcus was on three sports teams. He attended classes. And he needed to find a way to solve the complicated
scientific mystery of sports injuries.

“There’s not, like, an easy route to make that your life’s work,” Marcus says. When he left home in the late summer of 1984, there was no
field of study dedicated to injury prevention. Marcus endeavored to catch a fish that had never been caught, and he didn’t know where to cast his
line.

About that time, a researcher at the University of Chicago named Robin Hogarth was examining how people learn. As popularized by
David Epstein in Range, Hogarth suggested that games with clear rules and hard edges, like chess and darts, make “kind” learning environments
—the dynamics of the thing become clearer as you play. Other problems, though, are “wicked” and packed with misdirection. Some problems,
Hogarth says, are as complex as “Martian tennis”—people are playing all around you, but the rules are indecipherable and change all the time.
Hogarth and his coauthors opened a 2015 article with an anecdote from a New York City doctor a century prior, who had a knack for finding
typhoid cases: “His clinical technique included palpating patients’ tongues before making his pessimistic forecasts. Unfortunately, he was invari-

ably correct.” We later learn that the doctor had typhoid, and was giving it to patients by touching their tongues.

Sports injuries have long been treated like simple problems: something would break, you'd find it on a scan, and then address it. But
Marcus wanted to do something vastly more complex: to see the injury before it happened. There wasn’t even a clear field of academic study that
might capture it. How might hidden trouble signal itself? In blood values? Diet? Sleep patterns? Neuroscience? Physical therapy? Athletic train-
ing? Pick wrong, and Marcus might spend a decade down the rabbit hole of one field, only to learn that he needed to look elsewhere.

Where on campus would Marcus find a mentor? The answer turned out to be the men’s room. Before he had taken his first undergraduate
class, Marcus stepped up to a UC Santa Barbara urinal. As he recalls, a particularly short man began peeing next to him. “I swear I’m not in the
habit of talking to strangers at urinals,” says Marcus. But there was something about that guy; Marcus struck up a conversation. “And he asked me
what I was interested in. And I told him. He goes, ‘Well, that’s what I do.”

That’s how Marcus met legendary sports physiologist Steven Horvath. Marcus loved listening to Horvath, who often gave Marcus rides in

his convertible Cadillac, smoking cigars and dropping pearls of knowledge about everything from interracial relationships (Horvath was in one)

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

to surviving extreme cold (Horvath was a global expert). There was something about Horvath’s approach that fires Marcus up to this day. “Like,
he was just curious as fuck,” says Marcus, “and that almost gave me a green light to be as curious as I already was.”

Horvath began his career exploring limits at the controversial Harvard Fatigue Laboratory, where physiologists, biochemists, psycholo-
gists, biologists, physicians, sociologists, and anthropologists subjected research subjects to treadmills, a “climatic room,” an altitude chamber,
and a room for animal experiments.

In World War II, the military commissioned the Fatigue Lab to look into questions like how soldiers acclimate to hot climates. That’s when

Horvath, a Harvard Medical School student and research associate at the time, made his mark. Hot weather had been demonstrated to inspire
changes that could feel taxing, like higher blood volumes, increased sweat, and decreased urination. But the team’s big finding was that the brain
learned and adjusted. While getting acclimated to heat, the body’s ability to regulate salt can get out of whack—increased sweating, in that phase,
can deplete the mineral. But also, commonly, the body would become stingy, so that sweat would contain far less salt than normal, which can
cause its own complications. Horvath’s team found that the fix was to trust the body’s wildly adaptable nervous system to work it out over time.
“A man’s ability to do prolonged physical work in the heat,” they concluded, “improves markedly.”

The result fit a theme. The Harvard Fatigue Lab found that fatigue seemed to have a little to do with the body and a lot to do with the brain.
A well-trained athlete is sophisticated in achieving what they called a “biochemical steady state.” There are limits to our performance, but they
are tough to find in our physical construction.

After the war, the lab closed. Horvath ran a research institute at Iowa State before moving west in 1961 to found the Institute of Environ-
mental Stress at UC Santa Barbara, where they did things like ask sixty-two school children to walk around a track in Nevada for an hour in 108-

degree heat. By the time Marcus met him, Horvath had become a leading researcher into the effects of airborne pollution. Horvath found that

pollutants from cars and power plants—especially ozone—presented grave health concerns. In a 1976 article, Horvath found that “ozone had a

marked effect on the lung, causing a reduction in vital capacity.” UCSB students had worked out on treadmills while exposed to varying doses of
ozone, at different temperatures. Many complained of dry throat, headache, fatigue, or cough—and often struggled to take a full breath. During
ozone exposure, Horvath found, lung vital capacity declined an average of 350 milliliters, which effectively gave healthy young athletes the lungs
of someone two decades older.

The summer that Marcus arrived in Santa Barbara, the Olympics were just down the coast in Los Angeles. Horvath wrote that athletes
would be performing under stress from heat and “the presence of an extremely potent photochemical smog that may have as adverse an effect
on certain performances as did high altitude during the Mexico City Olympiad.”

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Horvath’s lessons felt like a secret history of sports performance—the athletes may be top notch, but what about the air? If Marcus had
more time, he’d explore it all. Marcus majored in biochemistry and shoehorned as many independent research projects into his schedule as
possible. “Just big white-paper studies,” he says, “where I’d go in and just study the hell out of some subject I was interested in. I’d read every aca-
demic journal I could find: VO2 max, lactate threshold, heart rate.”

It’s very rare for anyone to be on three college sports teams, but Marcus competed in track, cross-country, and cycling. If you had to pick a
social stereotype for him, “jock” would have been it—unless you hung out with him on the weekends. Marcus remembers being so steeped in re-
search that “I’d cite these studies from Weinberger in 1973.” Marcus was a hard-liner in both camps—the nerdiest jock, the jockiest nerd.

Those two things, to Marcus, had come to feel surprisingly similar in his post-ACL tear life. At football practice, fifty people had motivated
him by cajoling and hooting and cracking helmets. Crowds filled the stands on game day. Running, biking, and swimming were entirely different.
“You're always training and racing in the shadows,” Marcus says. “Nobody gives a fuck, nobody cheers, nobody cares!” The mental experience of
cross-country training was built on self-talk, on curiosity, on ongoing problem solving—much like academic research. “That’s an amazing driver,
an engine design for life,” Marcus says. “Studying in college is just like preparing for a triathlon. Nobody cared. You have to make a lot of choices to
work when other people make other choices. This is the period when I was like, ‘These are the real sports. Football, baseball... that stuff is soft.”

And then, one morning at the bagel shop, he added another layer to his identity. As he dug into the cream cheese, a customer asked if he

”

had ever considered modeling. “ ‘I think you'd be great,” Marcus remembers her saying, “and she gave me her card.” Before long he was at an
agency downtown, where they said promising things. They would make him a book!
But first, they’d need thousands of dollars for modeling classes. “I’m like, ‘What the fuck?’ This is the opposite of what I’m trying to do

”

here,” Marcus says. “On my way out, this guy was walking in, and he said, ‘You'd be perfect.” The guy wanted to know what Marcus would charge
for a couple days’ modeling work. Marcus made up a number and spent the following weekend making sixty dollars an hour. Soon, he stopped
selling bagels. The money bought him precious time to learn about bodies.

Marcus applied his scientific knowledge as much as possible, including to how he breathed. “I just saw my body as a machine to process
oxygen,” Marcus says, and he learned the freakish power of a good exhale. A shallow breath brings air mostly into the esophagus, where there is
no lung tissue to process oxygen. The air that matters gets into the lungs. So, Marcus began wringing air from his lungs with vicious exhales. To
this day, you might hear loud bear chuffs from Marcus running uphill. Once you get the spent air out, Marcus points out, “you barely have to work
to inhale. The lungs take their own shape again naturally.”

As he got more into triathlons, Marcus began early-morning workouts with a swim coach and assigned himself miles of open-water solo
swims. When his right shoulder got sore, his coach pointed out that his right hand crossed the midline of his body when he reached forward.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

When he put his hand where the coach wanted it, a centimeter to the right of the midline, it felt like it was three feet out to his side. But when he
swam that way, his pain melted away.

This was interesting. Marcus didn’t totally understand what was happening, but it felt like evidence that injuries signal themselves before
they arrive. His shoulder had been vulnerable. Then he tweaked the movement, and the problem evaporated. It was small confirmation of Mar-
cus’s big idea, that there were ways to make athletic bodies more robust.

Marcus had been reading the work of Tim Noakes. As a rower at the University of Cape Town in the 1970s, Noakes was tricked. The coach
told them to do six five-hundred-meter repeats. Then, surprise! The sneaky coach assigned another five hundred, and another, and another, and
another, for a total of ten.

Studying to become a medical doctor, Noakes knew the research of the day declared that athletes stopped competing because muscles
were at full work capacity. He felt that way himself. The sixth repeat had been all out.

And yet, Noakes wrote in his memoir Challenging Beliefs, his team’s boat moved faster still in the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth efforts.
No one could explain that, so Noakes thought he’d give it a try. “When I started my career, my lab had no money,” Noakes later told Outside
magazine. “All we could buy was a rectal thermometer and a weighing machine, a scale. All we did was go around measuring people’s tempera-
ture and weight after races.

“In fact, we borrowed the rectal thermometer.”

Noakes quickly began upending assumptions. A prominent colleague theorized that distance runners couldn't have heart disease. Noakes
analyzed the corpses of long-distance runners and found they absolutely could. Just as the sport drink industry began to push hydration, Noakes
showed that humans had invented a new way to die: overhydration, which diluted salt in the blood.

And in 1996, Noakes published his most important work, on what he called the “central governor.” Noakes found that “fatigue is an emo-
tion,” a refinement and advancement of ideas explored decades earlier at the Harvard Fatigue Laboratory.

Noakes argued, essentially, that in his sixth repeat that day in rowing practice, he had felt fatigue long before his body was depleted of
oxygen, glycogen, or any other vital resource—because instead of finding a hard physiological limit, he’d felt a subconscious signal, from his
brain, to slow down. Noakes posited that fatigue was the product of the brain, which acted like a “central governor,” to keep athletes from dying
from overexertion or overheating.

It’s an empowering idea. In The Lore of Running, Noakes writes about how “fatigue drives us back into ourselves, into those secluded parts
of our souls that we discover only under times of such duress and from which we emerge with a clearer perspective of the people we truly are.”

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

One of Marcus’s first triathlons was in Santa Barbara, for which he wore a mere Speedo as he ripped along on his bicycle at forty-five miles
an hour. He remembers being “maybe second or third overall” when a tire lost its grip, sending him sledding, as he recalls, “so far” along the as-
phalt on his backside.

Competitors shot past. Marcus stood and knew three things: 1) it would help nothing to look back there; 2) the pain was rooted in his
emotions; 3) the research shows that human bodies are alarmingly resilient. Marcus pedaled to the changeover as fast as he could, then popped
on his shoes for a ten-kilometer run, winding along waterfront palms.

The blood pooled in his sneaker. Step, squish, step. He overtook one runner, then the next. Marcus won back positioning; they won a close-
up of his backside. “Other competitors,” Marcus remembers, “were like, ‘Stop!’ They were horrified. They wanted to help me.”

A full-length triathlon, at the speed of a podium finisher, tests a body’s ability to process oxygen, in through the lungs and out to the
muscles. The vehicle of that transfer is blood, which is why losing a lot taxes an athlete. (One method of “blood doping” in the Tour de France is to
withdraw a pint of blood months before the race, which reportedly makes training arduous. Once their bodies replace the missing blood, riders
return to feeling normal. Then they reinfuse the extra pint during the race, feel tireless, and, in cycling’s doping era, sometimes win the Tour de
France.)

Marcus didn’t stop for the blood loss, though. He would run through negotiable emotional hurdles to see if he could find a hard physical
one. Marcus feels he had a motivational advantage from his ACL injury: to him, dropping out also hurt. “It was really all set up,” Marcus says,
“after having this injury and the depression, knowing what a lost opportunity feels like.”

At the finish line, Marcus didn’t win, but he did feel like a butterfly shedding his cocoon. What a revelation: he could keep going even after
powerful feelings told him to stop. So much of his training had been about times and weights and heart rates—but a tango with the impossible
packed a far bigger punch. “I just felt,” Marcus says, “so heroic.”

Researchers following in Noakes’s footsteps began exploring the ways the brain fools us. In his 2018 book Endure, Alex Hutchinson delves
into what are now known as belief effects. One example: People made fun of Michael Jordan for his superstition of wearing his University of North

Carolina shorts under his NBA uniform. But at the same time, research showed that saying, “Here is your ball. So far, it has turned out to be a lucky
ball,” got people to putt better than saying, “This is the ball that everyone has used so far.”

Another study showed that if you race on a treadmill against a virtual reality representation of yourself, you'll keep up with that character
—even if the researchers cheat and program it to go faster than you ever have. (If it goes a lot faster, though, you'll shatter.) But the implication is
that it matters, a lot, how fast you believe you can go.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

“For athletes, the simplest way of acquiring justified true belief about your capabilities is to test them: whatever you've done before, you
can do again, plus a little more,” writes Hutchinson of Noakes’s work. Noakes also suggested that high-intensity training, in particular, could re-
jigger the central governor—sprint training, for instance, affected the central governor more than long runs.

Marcus found race-day strategy here, too. Noakes wrote, “I suspect that dominant runners intimidate the central governors of their
competitors, forcing the intimidated governors to restrict the performances of their owners.” Blow past people, and let their own central gover-
nors click on and slow them down.

Asked to identify the toughest workouts of his life, Marcus answers “the Death Rides.” A pioneering coach of elite US cycling, Eddie
Borysewicz, ran a team based in Escondido, California, that would change names several times before eventually becoming the notorious US
Postal Service team. Professionals tuning up for the Tour de France, hard-core triathletes, college racers, and other assorted maniacs rolled north
out of San Diego every Wednesday morning.

Marcus spent Tuesdays at his girlfriend’s in Encinitas, and waited on the wide shoulder, early on Wednesdays, for the group to appear. “For
the first twenty miles or so, you'd roll along at twenty-three miles an hour,” says Marcus, who remembers that pace as manageable. “Then we’d
get to Camp Pendleton and turn uphill, and it was just punishing each other.” Sometimes Marcus let the leaders go. Sometimes he hung with the
lead pack to the top. “If you were one of the ones dishing out the punishment...” Marcus peaks his eyebrows, cocks his head a bit to one side, and
exhales with cheeks puffed out. Big deal.

In some ways, Marcus fit perfectly on a Death Ride, rolling with his outdoor tribe, chuffing uphill. But also, he was younger than almost
everyone, and more academic—his head bursting with Horvath and Noakes. Marcus slid into a kind of trainer side hustle, advising the Subaru-
Montgomery track cycling team and, for a time, legendary triathlete Mark Allen.

Harvard Medical School accepted Marcus, even though—it’s Marcus’s shameful secret—to this day he remains a few credits shy of his UCSB
biochemistry degree. He deferred his medical school admission to model, lifeguard, live in a VW bus, and travel the West, competing in triath-
lons. He was sponsored by the likes of Hobie sunglasses against competitors like Lance Armstrong.

Near the end of Harvard Medical School, Marcus arranged what the school calls a clerkship, essentially an internship, with Noakes in Cape
Town. There, Marcus found himself sitting outside, often with a stunning view, talking about bodies with brilliant people like physiologist John
Hawley and Louise Burke—later the head of nutrition at the Australian Institute of Sport.

A theme emerged: one-size-fits-all remedies are almost always wrong. Coaches tended to put one workout on the wall; there was a lot of
talk about what athletes should eat or what shoes they should wear. And yet, we all know, from standard medical care with its blood tests and X-

rays, that we’re each deficient and strong in different ways that should inform the remedy.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

In South Africa, Marcus made a research project of race-day nutrition. One decade, athletes were told carbs were all that mattered, then
came the protein years, followed by a decade of obsessing over designer fats. Each theory suggested there’d be a simple, bright-line answer for
everyone.

During this time, fat was seen as the worst possible nutrient. Marcus ran a test on peanuts, with mixed results, but he noticed that some
of the test subjects looked and reported feeling peppier with a bit of fat on board. It fit many signals suggesting that athletes would generally do
better ignoring extreme nutrition advice, eating, Marcus says, “like your grandparents ate,” with plenty of vegetables, some protein and fat, and
not a lot of processed food. Hard-and-fast rules beyond that fared poorly. “We can’t get the macronutrients straight!” Marcus says. “That’s not the
complex stuff. That’s like the ABCs of nutrition.” To this day, Marcus lets hunger be his guide, which, he says, makes him one of the only athletic
people in his Santa Barbara social circle who still puts cow’s milk in tea and doesn’t shrink from a wedge of brie. “That feels right to me,” he says,
adding, “I wish science had all the answers.”

The 1996 World Athletics Cross Country Championships had brought many of the world’s best runners to South Africa, eleven of whom
visited Noakes’s lab. Kenyan and Ethiopian runners ended up winning eighteen of the twenty-four medals at the championship, including every

gold. Over two intensive days, they were assessed in every imaginable manner, from the size of their thighs to the contents of their blood. The

simple finding was that the Black East African runners had no obvious physiological advantages (not VO2 max, not muscle fiber type compos-
ition, not muscle strength) over the other runners. Nevertheless, they demonstrated “superior fatigue resistance” in the form of lower blood lac-
tate concentration after heavy doses of running.

Some runners roll along flat and low, Marcus says, “like a tractor,” while others bob up and down. To Marcus’s eyes, the best runners from
East Africa were “so much more bouncy than the white runners.” He noticed how their feet struck the ground, and how the force of landing
passed quickly up to the big muscles of the hips. The research was about fatigue resistance, but it gave Marcus ideas about springiness and injury
prevention. “Everything in my brain,” Marcus says, “from my experience in sport, told me that was safer.”

In these years, Marcus’s side hustle as a trainer evolved. He ran speed and agility clinics alongside Canadian national team coach Brent
McFarlane and advised Olympic runners, including world-record sprinter Asafa Powell. A lot of his work was in preventing injuries, particularly
in hamstrings. Before he left for South Africa, Marcus had gotten a phone call about that work from orthopedic surgeon Bertram Zarins.

“Zarins was an important figure,” says Marcus, “because he was one of the top three sports docs in the country. By name, by recognition,
by publication. Lead doctor for the Olympics. Team doctor for all the pro sports teams in Boston.” They arranged a meeting that, on the wings of
enthusiastic conversation, stretched to three hours.

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Marcus remembers Zarins telling him about NFL players coming to camp with known back injuries, and having the strength coach
welcome them with maximum-weight squat testing. Marcus remembers Zarins saying, “We had two guys blow up in testing.” A lot of people as-
sume everything that happens in elite sports is elite. But Marcus says Zarins “knows how dumb it is, because he lives there.”

They resolved that, when Marcus returned from South Africa, he would join Zarins at the Patriots for a special project. After dozens of
injuries, especially to star receiver Terry Glenn, the team’s billionaire chairman and CEO, Robert Kraft, demanded that the team get better at
hamstrings.

Running across the back of the hip and knee, the three main muscles of the hamstring are twitchy, generally brilliant, and particularly
tested as a running foot hits the ground. Just as the hamstrings straighten the hip pushing the leg out behind, they also work to bend the knee,
and then they catch forces coming up from landing. This raises questions about the tensile strength of muscles. “They tend to get weaker as they
get stretched more, but there’s an area where they get weaker faster,” explains Marcus, who notes that a typical hamstring injury occurs in full
sprint. “You're in a super-stretched position, which makes the muscle vulnerable, and you're not very strong, and you have all this weight com-
ing down and wanting to flex your hip and maybe to extend your knee, and both of those things stretch your hamstring.”

Marcus was years into hamstring research. Clearly, strength mattered. A buzzy 0.6 ratio had caught on in the industry. Hamstring injuries,
the thinking went, could be reduced by making sure that the hamstring was at least 60 percent (or 0.6) as strong as the quadriceps. Sit on your
butt, see how much weight you can push by straightening your legs against resistance, and that’s your quad measure. Then flip to your tummy,
and curl your heels toward your butt, and that’s the hamstring measure. Tidy and clean, measurable in any school gym or physical therapist’s
office, the 0.6 ratio had been around since the time of Eisenhower’s heart attack. The ratio came from studies that explored the differences

between athletes who had injured their hamstrings with those who had not; the healthy people had hamstrings that seemed stronger compared
to their quadriceps.

Marcus says it might be “better to infer that hamstrings that are injured remain chronically weak.” Under scrutiny, the 0.6 ratio fell apart.
A 2002 survey of all available hamstring research concluded that “the cause of hamstring injuries is still unclear.” Longitudinal studies found

little or no correlation between the 0.6 ratio and injury risk. The whole concept had issues: mostly, the hamstring seldom operates alone—it’s in
the middle of the “posterior chain” of muscles, running up and down the body. Assessing it in isolation missed a lot of nuance. On top of that,
they measured its strength while shortening, bending the leg at the knee. But hamstring injuries tend to happen with the leg moving the oppos-
ite way, extending out in front.

Yet the 0.6 ratio lingers in gyms and physical therapists’ offices nonetheless, arguably because it papers over a very confusing reality.

“We're searching for answers,” says Marcus, “which is the human condition. So, they found some ratio they liked.”

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Marcus pored over the data. “Every hamstring injury that happened in the NFL, I had sliced and diced,” he says. Marcus wanted to know
if hamstring injuries happened at certain times of year, at certain positions, or to athletes with certain biomechanical signatures or medical
histories.

Marcus found evidence the answer to every one of those questions was “yes.” NFL hamstring injuries usually happened in preseason, at

positions like receiver and cornerback that sprint in the open field. And four kinds of players were especially vulnerable: those who had weak

terior tilt to their hips.

Picture the pelvis as a bowl of cereal. Ideally, it’s level, spilling no milk. Marcus saw that players who had the bowl tipped backward had
a higher likelihood of stressed hamstrings. “When they sprint,” Marcus says, “they tend to overstride with this posterior pelvic tilt.” Effectively,
their hips aimed their legs forward, so the feet flew out in front. “And a lot of them,” Marcus continues, “when they contact the ground, on initial
contact, they flex their hips a little bit more. So, they don’t immediately go into pulling. They actually sink into that a little more. Mechanically,
that should put a significant stretch on the hamstring.” Marcus is convinced this posterior tilt is a big factor. Most hamstring injuries occur in

fantastically powerful athletes; when more human people injure hamstrings, Marcus finds the reason is almost always poor pelvic control.

NEUTRAL PELVIS POSTERIOR PELVIC TILT

Follow for extended description

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

“The thing about hamstrings,” Marcus says, “is that you don’t want to have a second one. The second one is so much worse.” It’s not in the
literature, but what Marcus observed was that a first hamstring injury did two things: it suggested biomechanical issues, and the injury itself left
a legacy. Often, there would be a knot of scar tissue, and muscular adhesion, where stressed collagen fibers stick to adjacent tissue, all of which
makes a muscle less stretchy. On top of that, it’s common that the nervous system would get antsy. “When you have some protection going on,”
Marcus says, “you don’t let it relax completely, it doesn’t stretch completely, you lose elasticity.”

Zarins helped Marcus get funding through the NFL Medical Committee. They gathered a decade of data from across the NFL and found
1,716 strains. “More than half (51.3%) of hamstring strains occurred during the 7-week preseason,” Zarins and Marcus would later write, with
colleagues. “The most commonly injured positions were the defensive secondary, accounting for 23.1% of the injuries; the wide receivers, ac-
counting for 20.8%; and special teams, constituting 13.0% of the injuries in the study.”

Marcus had to adjust to a culture that wasn’t as curious as Harvard Medical School or Cape Town. Marcus remembers Zarins blanching
when he pitched that someone should study the long-term effects of anabolic steroid use—which was evident, a health concern, and not well re-
searched. “I didn’t understand the environment,” says Marcus. “I wouldn't do that now.”

The Patriots’ strength and conditioning coach, Johnny Parker, Marcus says, “didn’t like me. Honestly, it was my first experience with that,
of feeling that I was clearly bringing something right, contributing, helping the team, and it didn’t matter.” Parker had been an NFL strength
coach for decades; Marcus was a twenty-seven-year-old with opinions. “I kind of get it now,” Marcus says.

But people across the Patriots organization jumped on the hamstring project. In a burst of activity before the end of the season, they
measured every player’s hamstring strength, charted their positions, and did video analysis of sprinting form. Every player earned a hamstring
risk score, which was higher if you had weak or asymmetrical hamstrings, poor sprint mechanics, poor sprint endurance, or played at a high-risk
position like defensive back.

Then Marcus spent much of the offseason visiting the high-risk players to deliver personalized programs designed to change their own
unique patterns of movement to reduce the risk of injury. Marcus was bringing a teaspoon of White’s preventive cardiology to the Patriots’
hamstrings.

“We go from a mean of twenty-three hamstrings—22.9 or something—over the previous five years,” says Marcus, “to three.” The implica-
tions were massive. In 2019, the Associated Press estimated that NFL teams spend more than half a billion dollars a year on injured players, most

of whom are dealing with lower extremity injuries—to say nothing of the multifaceted benefits to players and teams of health. Marcus felt they’d

cracked the code, and was quoted in Sports Illustrated as saying, “If teams implement reasonably smart hamstring injury prevention programs,

these injuries can largely be prevented.”

 
BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Marcus was fired up to publish the results, but Zarins delivered crushing news. The Patriots, feeling they had a competitive advantage,
wouldn’t allow it. Everything would stay secret. “My first thought,” says Marcus, “was ‘Fuck that.’”

Marcus did find a partner in preventing injuries: Patriots trainer Ron O’Neil, whom Marcus calls “one of the best athletic trainers I’ve ever
worked with.” But the more cautious approach to injuries that appealed to O’Neil sometimes meant holding players out of games, which was at

”

odds with new head coach Bill Belichick. “His model,” Marcus says of the coach, “was ‘get him out there.” A February 2002 Super Bowl victory
gave Belichick enough organizational leverage to make changes. Weeks later, the team announced that, after eighteen years, O’Neil would leave
the Patriots to run a new sports therapy and rehabilitation center.

Marcus began to wonder if the NFL was the right place for him. The league had brilliant people like Zarins, incredible athletes, and, at least
when Robert Kraft insisted upon it, a willingness to innovate. They had demonstrated, with the hamstring project, that some bodies are more
robust than others, and that there’s useful work to be done to injury-proof elite athletes. One of the most tenacious enemies Marcus encountered
on his quest to prevent injuries was a lack of curiosity, and the shrug as someone says, “Injuries happen.”

Pro football also had, in the spirit of Moneyball, old-timers who just weren’t all that curious. Marcus remembers the moment he lost faith
in the NFL. He was in the stands with the scouts at the predraft combine in Indianapolis. Marcus watched the drills with a head full of science,
obsessing over the implications of pelvic tilts, bouncy gaits, and the many nuances of human biomechanics.

“T’m sitting with the Dunkin’ Donuts chew spit guys,” Marcus says, “and this guy runs through the drill, he hauled ass, but he’s pretty
lumbering, not a great mover. But he smacks the bag, at the end, mega-hard. He hits it perfect—it made like a gunshot sound. The scouts all go
crazy and scribble down his number.”

Marcus looked right, looked left, and noticed that the brain trust of the NFL didn’t care much about posterior tilt, but loved a gunshot
sound. And he thought to himself, “OK, Iam out.”

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

r

eeoee5xo5o5se3eoeee#eeee#ee#eee ef @ @

Olympic Movement

Nature is pleased with simplicity.

—Isaac Newton

STEIN METZGER AND KEVIN WONG finished the 2002 pro beach volleyball season as the sixth-ranked team. But the 2003 season would deter-
mine which two teams would represent the United States at the Athens Olympics. So, they’d have to step it up.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

After years of sampling private trainers, high-profile coaches, and everything in between, Metzger felt he had finally perfected his exercise
routine in the UCLA gym and was coming into the 2003 season strong. The six-foot, seven-inch Wong had been Metzger’s teammate since the
Punahou School back in Hawaii, and they had roomed together in college. Beach volleyball duos ideally combine a smaller, nimble defender, like
the six-foot-three Metzger, who ranges all over the sand to keep the ball in play, and a blocker who patrols the airspace above the net. In August,
halfway through the season, Wong and Metzger were in the hunt for the Olympics after a respectable second-place finish at a tournament in
Austria.

Metzger flew to the next tournament in Prague; his phone rang as he got off the plane. It was his girlfriend, who read aloud from the LA

Times: Wong had dumped Metzger. In the story, Wong said things like “it’s a lot easier to get to the top of the mountain with someone who has

been there.” Wong would pair with Eric Fonoimoana, winner of Olympic gold in Sydney in 2000.

The Times called Wong and Fonoimoana “a new potential powerhouse” that “should start winning right away.” Beach volleyball would be
live on national TV for the first time, starting the following weekend. The article included a huge full-color photo of Fonoimoana next to bubbly
talk from the tour’s commissioner saying the sport needed “to create heroes for our fans.” Maybe Metzger didn’t count as a hero?

Metzger had prepared his whole life for this season, but he had not prepared to find a new teammate. One obvious candidate: Fonoimoana’s
just-dumped partner, Dax Holdren. The reason Holdren was available, according to Fonoimoana, was because Holdren was “just not healing
enough to compete against the big guys.” Holdren’s knee was not the only concern: he was also, like Metzger, a six-foot, three-inch defender.

Metzger and Holdren got together, called themselves the Dumpees, and took stock. They had no blocker, two defenders, zero Olympic
qualifying points, and little time. A doctor had told Holdren his days as an elite player might be over, but he was working out with a new guy in
Santa Barbara. He urged his new partner to make the two-hour drive north to join them.

On paper, Marcus was broke. “I came out of medical school,” Marcus says, “with $360,000 debt.” The jobs he could get in professional
sports, working for a team, paid fifty grand or so. He owed around forty grand a year on his college loans.

So, he decided to borrow more money. “I remember the rationalization,” Marcus says. “I could go work these crappy jobs right now, and
make very little, and pay for this stuff. Or I could go do what I want to do and hopefully get paid quite a bit more.”

Marcus’s big mission had, for the moment, a tiny footprint. Mike Swan, once Marcus’s triathlon training partner and one of the best bike
racers and triathletes at UCSB, had a physical therapy clinic in Santa Barbara. He agreed to rent Marcus a patch of floor in the back for Marcus’s
Peak Performance Project, or P3. (“How big,” I asked, “was your patch of floor?” Marcus paused our hike and pointed to a fallen tree and said, “It
was from there .. .”—he moved his pointer along to a twiggy branch—“. . . to there.” It looked like about twenty feet.)

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

After years of sampling private trainers, high-profile coaches, and everything in between, Metzger felt he had finally perfected his exercise
routine in the UCLA gym and was coming into the 2003 season strong. The six-foot, seven-inch Wong had been Metzger’s teammate since the
Punahou School back in Hawaii, and they had roomed together in college. Beach volleyball duos ideally combine a smaller, nimble defender, like
the six-foot-three Metzger, who ranges all over the sand to keep the ball in play, and a blocker who patrols the airspace above the net. In August,
halfway through the season, Wong and Metzger were in the hunt for the Olympics after a respectable second-place finish at a tournament in
Austria.

Metzger flew to the next tournament in Prague; his phone rang as he got off the plane. It was his girlfriend, who read aloud from the LA

Times: Wong had dumped Metzger. In the story, Wong said things like “it’s a lot easier to get to the top of the mountain with someone who has

been there.” Wong would pair with Eric Fonoimoana, winner of Olympic gold in Sydney in 2000.

The Times called Wong and Fonoimoana “a new potential powerhouse” that “should start winning right away.” Beach volleyball would be
live on national TV for the first time, starting the following weekend. The article included a huge full-color photo of Fonoimoana next to bubbly
talk from the tour’s commissioner saying the sport needed “to create heroes for our fans.” Maybe Metzger didn’t count as a hero?

Metzger had prepared his whole life for this season, but he had not prepared to find a new teammate. One obvious candidate: Fonoimoana’s
just-dumped partner, Dax Holdren. The reason Holdren was available, according to Fonoimoana, was because Holdren was “just not healing
enough to compete against the big guys.” Holdren’s knee was not the only concern: he was also, like Metzger, a six-foot, three-inch defender.

Metzger and Holdren got together, called themselves the Dumpees, and took stock. They had no blocker, two defenders, zero Olympic
qualifying points, and little time. A doctor had told Holdren his days as an elite player might be over, but he was working out with a new guy in
Santa Barbara. He urged his new partner to make the two-hour drive north to join them.

On paper, Marcus was broke. “I came out of medical school,” Marcus says, “with $360,000 debt.” The jobs he could get in professional
sports, working for a team, paid fifty grand or so. He owed around forty grand a year on his college loans.

So, he decided to borrow more money. “I remember the rationalization,” Marcus says. “I could go work these crappy jobs right now, and
make very little, and pay for this stuff. Or I could go do what I want to do and hopefully get paid quite a bit more.”

Marcus’s big mission had, for the moment, a tiny footprint. Mike Swan, once Marcus’s triathlon training partner and one of the best bike
racers and triathletes at UCSB, had a physical therapy clinic in Santa Barbara. He agreed to rent Marcus a patch of floor in the back for Marcus’s
Peak Performance Project, or P3. (“How big,” I asked, “was your patch of floor?” Marcus paused our hike and pointed to a fallen tree and said, “It
was from there .. .”—he moved his pointer along to a twiggy branch—“. . . to there.” It looked like about twenty feet.)

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

After years of sampling private trainers, high-profile coaches, and everything in between, Metzger felt he had finally perfected his exercise
routine in the UCLA gym and was coming into the 2003 season strong. The six-foot, seven-inch Wong had been Metzger’s teammate since the
Punahou School back in Hawaii, and they had roomed together in college. Beach volleyball duos ideally combine a smaller, nimble defender, like
the six-foot-three Metzger, who ranges all over the sand to keep the ball in play, and a blocker who patrols the airspace above the net. In August,
halfway through the season, Wong and Metzger were in the hunt for the Olympics after a respectable second-place finish at a tournament in
Austria.

Metzger flew to the next tournament in Prague; his phone rang as he got off the plane. It was his girlfriend, who read aloud from the LA

Times: Wong had dumped Metzger. In the story, Wong said things like “it’s a lot easier to get to the top of the mountain with someone who has

been there.” Wong would pair with Eric Fonoimoana, winner of Olympic gold in Sydney in 2000.

The Times called Wong and Fonoimoana “a new potential powerhouse” that “should start winning right away.” Beach volleyball would be
live on national TV for the first time, starting the following weekend. The article included a huge full-color photo of Fonoimoana next to bubbly
talk from the tour’s commissioner saying the sport needed “to create heroes for our fans.” Maybe Metzger didn’t count as a hero?

Metzger had prepared his whole life for this season, but he had not prepared to find a new teammate. One obvious candidate: Fonoimoana’s
just-dumped partner, Dax Holdren. The reason Holdren was available, according to Fonoimoana, was because Holdren was “just not healing
enough to compete against the big guys.” Holdren’s knee was not the only concern: he was also, like Metzger, a six-foot, three-inch defender.

Metzger and Holdren got together, called themselves the Dumpees, and took stock. They had no blocker, two defenders, zero Olympic
qualifying points, and little time. A doctor had told Holdren his days as an elite player might be over, but he was working out with a new guy in
Santa Barbara. He urged his new partner to make the two-hour drive north to join them.

On paper, Marcus was broke. “I came out of medical school,” Marcus says, “with $360,000 debt.” The jobs he could get in professional
sports, working for a team, paid fifty grand or so. He owed around forty grand a year on his college loans.

So, he decided to borrow more money. “I remember the rationalization,” Marcus says. “I could go work these crappy jobs right now, and
make very little, and pay for this stuff. Or I could go do what I want to do and hopefully get paid quite a bit more.”

Marcus’s big mission had, for the moment, a tiny footprint. Mike Swan, once Marcus’s triathlon training partner and one of the best bike
racers and triathletes at UCSB, had a physical therapy clinic in Santa Barbara. He agreed to rent Marcus a patch of floor in the back for Marcus’s
Peak Performance Project, or P3. (“How big,” I asked, “was your patch of floor?” Marcus paused our hike and pointed to a fallen tree and said, “It
was from there .. .”—he moved his pointer along to a twiggy branch—“. . . to there.” It looked like about twenty feet.)

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

After years of sampling private trainers, high-profile coaches, and everything in between, Metzger felt he had finally perfected his exercise
routine in the UCLA gym and was coming into the 2003 season strong. The six-foot, seven-inch Wong had been Metzger’s teammate since the
Punahou School back in Hawaii, and they had roomed together in college. Beach volleyball duos ideally combine a smaller, nimble defender, like
the six-foot-three Metzger, who ranges all over the sand to keep the ball in play, and a blocker who patrols the airspace above the net. In August,
halfway through the season, Wong and Metzger were in the hunt for the Olympics after a respectable second-place finish at a tournament in
Austria.

Metzger flew to the next tournament in Prague; his phone rang as he got off the plane. It was his girlfriend, who read aloud from the LA

Times: Wong had dumped Metzger. In the story, Wong said things like “it’s a lot easier to get to the top of the mountain with someone who has

been there.” Wong would pair with Eric Fonoimoana, winner of Olympic gold in Sydney in 2000.

The Times called Wong and Fonoimoana “a new potential powerhouse” that “should start winning right away.” Beach volleyball would be
live on national TV for the first time, starting the following weekend. The article included a huge full-color photo of Fonoimoana next to bubbly
talk from the tour’s commissioner saying the sport needed “to create heroes for our fans.” Maybe Metzger didn’t count as a hero?

Metzger had prepared his whole life for this season, but he had not prepared to find a new teammate. One obvious candidate: Fonoimoana’s
just-dumped partner, Dax Holdren. The reason Holdren was available, according to Fonoimoana, was because Holdren was “just not healing
enough to compete against the big guys.” Holdren’s knee was not the only concern: he was also, like Metzger, a six-foot, three-inch defender.

Metzger and Holdren got together, called themselves the Dumpees, and took stock. They had no blocker, two defenders, zero Olympic
qualifying points, and little time. A doctor had told Holdren his days as an elite player might be over, but he was working out with a new guy in
Santa Barbara. He urged his new partner to make the two-hour drive north to join them.

On paper, Marcus was broke. “I came out of medical school,” Marcus says, “with $360,000 debt.” The jobs he could get in professional
sports, working for a team, paid fifty grand or so. He owed around forty grand a year on his college loans.

So, he decided to borrow more money. “I remember the rationalization,” Marcus says. “I could go work these crappy jobs right now, and
make very little, and pay for this stuff. Or I could go do what I want to do and hopefully get paid quite a bit more.”

Marcus’s big mission had, for the moment, a tiny footprint. Mike Swan, once Marcus’s triathlon training partner and one of the best bike
racers and triathletes at UCSB, had a physical therapy clinic in Santa Barbara. He agreed to rent Marcus a patch of floor in the back for Marcus’s
Peak Performance Project, or P3. (“How big,” I asked, “was your patch of floor?” Marcus paused our hike and pointed to a fallen tree and said, “It
was from there .. .”—he moved his pointer along to a twiggy branch—“. . . to there.” It looked like about twenty feet.)

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

After years of sampling private trainers, high-profile coaches, and everything in between, Metzger felt he had finally perfected his exercise
routine in the UCLA gym and was coming into the 2003 season strong. The six-foot, seven-inch Wong had been Metzger’s teammate since the
Punahou School back in Hawaii, and they had roomed together in college. Beach volleyball duos ideally combine a smaller, nimble defender, like
the six-foot-three Metzger, who ranges all over the sand to keep the ball in play, and a blocker who patrols the airspace above the net. In August,
halfway through the season, Wong and Metzger were in the hunt for the Olympics after a respectable second-place finish at a tournament in
Austria.

Metzger flew to the next tournament in Prague; his phone rang as he got off the plane. It was his girlfriend, who read aloud from the LA

Times: Wong had dumped Metzger. In the story, Wong said things like “it’s a lot easier to get to the top of the mountain with someone who has

been there.” Wong would pair with Eric Fonoimoana, winner of Olympic gold in Sydney in 2000.

The Times called Wong and Fonoimoana “a new potential powerhouse” that “should start winning right away.” Beach volleyball would be
live on national TV for the first time, starting the following weekend. The article included a huge full-color photo of Fonoimoana next to bubbly
talk from the tour’s commissioner saying the sport needed “to create heroes for our fans.” Maybe Metzger didn’t count as a hero?

Metzger had prepared his whole life for this season, but he had not prepared to find a new teammate. One obvious candidate: Fonoimoana’s
just-dumped partner, Dax Holdren. The reason Holdren was available, according to Fonoimoana, was because Holdren was “just not healing
enough to compete against the big guys.” Holdren’s knee was not the only concern: he was also, like Metzger, a six-foot, three-inch defender.

Metzger and Holdren got together, called themselves the Dumpees, and took stock. They had no blocker, two defenders, zero Olympic
qualifying points, and little time. A doctor had told Holdren his days as an elite player might be over, but he was working out with a new guy in
Santa Barbara. He urged his new partner to make the two-hour drive north to join them.

On paper, Marcus was broke. “I came out of medical school,” Marcus says, “with $360,000 debt.” The jobs he could get in professional
sports, working for a team, paid fifty grand or so. He owed around forty grand a year on his college loans.

So, he decided to borrow more money. “I remember the rationalization,” Marcus says. “I could go work these crappy jobs right now, and
make very little, and pay for this stuff. Or I could go do what I want to do and hopefully get paid quite a bit more.”

Marcus’s big mission had, for the moment, a tiny footprint. Mike Swan, once Marcus’s triathlon training partner and one of the best bike
racers and triathletes at UCSB, had a physical therapy clinic in Santa Barbara. He agreed to rent Marcus a patch of floor in the back for Marcus’s
Peak Performance Project, or P3. (“How big,” I asked, “was your patch of floor?” Marcus paused our hike and pointed to a fallen tree and said, “It
was from there .. .”—he moved his pointer along to a twiggy branch—“. . . to there.” It looked like about twenty feet.)

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Sometimes he’d take clients to other places to work out. One day in the gym at UCSB, with a tennis player client in tow, Marcus stopped
walking when he saw a blond woman on the stairmaster. Nadine was freshly arrived from Germany, had just joined the gym, and thought—as a
child of the Alps, used to mountain climbing—she would try out this odd-looking American contraption.

But when she got on it, the machine was incredibly stiff. Nadine’s English is perfect, but it’s a second language, accented, and occasionally
charmingly inventive. This machine, she said, was “clompy,” just slapping her feet and jamming the stairs down.

“Do you need help?” was the first thing Marcus ever said to the love of his life.

She said she was fine, thanks. She was getting off that machine anyway, because she didn’t like it.

Marcus nodded. “I’m not a huge fan of that machine, either,” he said “but it works a lot better if you plug it in.” Nadine laughs telling the
story now.

A few days later, Marcus was out with friends, a married couple, and there was Nadine. By some miracle, Marcus’s American friends had
met in the tiny town in the Bavarian Alps where Nadine had grown up. The table filled with an Alpine glow. Soon Nadine was dating a Harvard
doctor with huge plans and a tiny gym.

Marcus biked on Gibraltar Road above Santa Barbara—several thousand feet of breathtaking ocean views, sagebrush, and ten-foot-tall
white-flowering chaparral yucca. One day in the early 2000s, Marcus walked up the driveway of the house with the best view and said hi. The
couple who lived in the multimillion-dollar Spanish-style house said they’d always kept their guest house empty so that friends could stop by, but
why not let Marcus and Nadine rent it?

They spent their weekends above the tree line. On weekdays, Marcus rolled out what he calls a “plyometric runway” in the back of Swan’s
physical therapy place, and built a practice training a mishmash of high school and college athletes—until Dax Holdren arrived as P3’s first pro-
fessional athlete.

Marcus remembers that Holdren had a “significant lesion” on his femur and arrived literally in tears, wondering if his career might be over.
Something about what happened next gripped Holdren in a way that caused him to call Metzger again and again. “Just come up once and see what
this guy is doing.”

Metzger says he “didn’t feel like he needed to drive all the way to Santa Barbara to work out.” On the other hand, Metzger wasn’t married,
didn’t have kids, and lived in a VW bus. He drove up in the name of being a good teammate.

P3 was way more than two hours, it seemed, from UCLA. Metzger says he walked past the physical therapy tables feeling “completely
skeptical. Like, ‘What is going on here? This is Mickey Mouse stuff.”

Marcus got Metzger talking—about his body and his goals, then directed Metzger to move back and forth across the world’s smallest gym.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

“I just felt instantly,” Metzger says, “like I’m totally doing the right things right now.”

Metzger arrived with little faith and impeccable sensors. When things changed in his back or hips or neck, he had questions. Marcus had
plain-English answers. “Your body moves this way, because of that,” remembers Metzger. “We want to teach your body to do this.”

P3’s sole motion-capture tool was Marcus’s two eyes. “Athletes would literally walk in the door,” Metzger says, “and he could tell what that
athlete needed, in terms of the holes... what they needed to plug in their system to be a complete athlete. That’s crazy.”

This kind of talk unsettles Marcus. He wants to drag the field away from snake oil and faith healers, and toward the world of evidence, the
scientific method, and force plates. At the same time, he’s the son of a sculptor who measures things in log lengths.

Marcus wanted Metzger to master the squishy-sounding “quality of movement.” To Marcus, merely strengthening this or that muscle
makes you a great athlete about as reliably as piano scales make you Thelonius Monk. The key isn’t hitting a note, it’s linking together a thousand
notes in thrilling ways.

A full orchestra has about ninety musicians, whose beauty emanates from the integrated efforts of the composer, the conductor, and the
individual musicians’ artistry, informed by practice. An athlete’s body is like that orchestra, only instead of ninety musicians, it has six hundred
muscles, conducted by the cerebellum, cortex, basal ganglia, and other brain parts integral to motor control.

Metzger’s visits to Santa Barbara were, in Marcus’s view, a chance for his muscle orchestra to learn new music. If the Dumpees were to
dominate, they’d need Metzger spiking the living crap out of the ball. In explosive rotational forces like that, the body’s soft tissues swing around
the spine like Ginger Rogers grasping a pillar. Anchoring one end unleashes the other to fly. Many of the most fun movements in sports—hitting
a baseball, throwing a javelin, spiking a volleyball—count on that kind of rotation. But Metzger had slumping posture that messed all that up.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

KYPHOSIS

TYPICAL


Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Follow for extended description

No one stands perfectly straight. The upper part of even the healthiest back angles forward a little. Angle a bit more and my grandma
might poke you in the kidneys at dinner. Tip forward more than forty-five degrees and it’s diagnosable kyphosis. Long seen as the result of osteo-
porosis or violent accidents, nowadays kyphosis is often associated with using keyboards.

Marcus uses the phrase computer back more often than he uses computers. He calls it the most pervasive biomechanical issue among
“normies.” No doubt you see curved spines and hanging heads tilting at laptops or phones in your home and workplace. I notice it in NBA locker
rooms and among professional athletes waiting for Ubers.

Kyphosis causes practical issues. “You can’t reach as high,” says Marcus. There aren’t a ton of jobs where that matters, but volleyball player
is one. “And you're not as strong. The vertebrae aren’t stacked on top of each other with optimal confirmation and support from the paraspinal
muscles. They’re only partially stacked. It’s not letting bones support each other if they’re overlapping by 30 percent over the edge, one after
another. It’s not a strong structure.” Marcus says people with kyphosis are often weak doing things above their heads. “They tend to get strains of
the paraspinal muscles, and they have the head trying to shear down.”

You can get away with kyphosis in straight-line sports like distance running. (Watch Olympic medal-winning mid-distance runner
Timothy Cheruiyot.) But it inhibits explosive lateral movement, which is key for volleyball players, and which requires nervous system coordin-
ation akin to a conductor drifting an arm to summon the violins, a moment later the violas, and then finally the cellos.

Doctors treat kyphosis with surgery, body braces, special beds, or the “Schroth Method,” which involves putting a pillow under the back
and stretching the shoulders back toward the floor.

Marcus has a different approach: he rehearses the orchestra. “There really is a fix,” Marcus says, calling kyphosis “very changeable. We have

a bunch of therapies we throw at these, and it’s not just telling people to bring their shoulders back. My one go-to is the snatch squat press.”

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Follow for extended description

SNATCH SQUAT PRESS

This is a move where you put a barbell behind your head, sit into a squat, and then remain squatted as you push the bar up with your arms.

For most people, squatting with a bar across their shoulders and then pushing up produces conflicting emotions. Obviously, they feel
weight, but also alarm and confusion from the base of the neck to the bottom of the ribs.

If you have healthy posture, there is a reasonable amount of spinal support for your pressing arms, in the stacked vertebrae and the tissues
that surround them. If you’re kyphotic, you'll feel their absence. “Moving a long lever in a way that is not supported, it’s really a muscular adapta-
tion,” says Marcus. “It’s also putting pressure on ligaments and all the connective tissue. The entire system is being challenged.” Sensing weakness
in an unsupported movement, the nervous system tends to beef up the soft tissue along the spine, which pulls the vertebrae into a tidier stack.

“For people with significant thoracic curve,” Marcus says, the snatch squat press is “super, super hard.” Many start with a broom in place of
the bar, say, or heels elevated on small blocks to reduce the angles involved.

Marcus says the snatch squat press is “basically forcing all of the body’s wisdom to be applied to solve this problem.”

The mistake, though, is to take that first-rep disorientation as a reason to stop. A lot of exercises challenge muscles. It feels weirder to
challenge well-worn movement patterns.

Paired with foam rolling and strength exercises, Marcus says the snatch squat press produces results: “I’ve seen this fixed in so many
people. Not just nineteen-year-olds. If you push on it enough, it just changes. Not like a multiyear fix, either. It can change a lot in a matter of
months.”

On Marcus’s rolled-out mat, they improved Metzger’s posture, thoracic movement, and kill speed. Metzger’s VW bus came to feel at home
round-tripping up the 101. Twice a week he’d camp somewhere beautiful, get up early to horse around in the ocean, show up a little salty and
sandy at P3, and then refine the orchestral movement of his volleyball muscles.

One day, Metzger rented a boat to sail to the Channel Islands and invited Marcus. Metzger likes things pretty buttoned up, and he had
plenty to worry about for this trip: the new boat, the wind, the fact he hadn’t been sailing in a while, and the famously tricky navigation into the
Catalina Island cove.

“The next thing you know, the sun’s going down and we're only halfway there, because we were like, ‘We need to sail, we’re not motoring.”

They both remember Marcus, glass of wine in hand, steering the boat with his foot, blasting the Boozoo Bajou song “Night over Manaus.” It’s a

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

drum circle of a song with a slap-slap-slap that could be waves on a hull. There basically aren’t words, other than a shamanic chant. “We may,”
Marcus says, “have smoked a joint.” They arrived in darkness but had a blast.

In some ways, Metzger’s kyphosis was the Dumpees’ easiest problem. They had to save Holdren’s career by teaching him how to move in
femur-friendly ways, and oh yeah, as they were both natural defenders, someone would have to learn to play out of position, as a blocker up
against the tall opponents at the net.

Metzger drew the short straw and would learn to get long. For this project, Marcus assigned two-legged Olympic lifts, to get a very solid
base to jump from the standing position, which is what happens at the net—and which is a big change from leaping laterally off one foot, dig-
ging balls out of the sand.

And every weekend they were off to battle for Olympic qualifying points. “When I met him,” Metzger says of Marcus, “this was a phase in
my career when I was doing pretty well. I was getting, like, some fifths and would maybe squeak out a win now and then.” With Kevin Wong,
Metzger won the 2002 Espinho Open in Portugal. “I started training with [Marcus] and all of a sudden I was in final fours consistently, every
weekend.” He says that “the first eighteen months I spent with Marcus... translated to real, I mean real money, for me for the first time.”

In October, the Dumpees arrived at the world championships on the white sands of Copacabana Beach. The stands were a rolling dance
party, the weather so hot the organizers soaked the crowd with sprinklers. Holdren and Metzger had been paired for less than two months, and
arrived as the fifteenth-seeded team. Dain Blanton and Jeff Nygaard would likely take one American Olympic spot—the Dumpees and dumpers
would fight for the other.

The Dumpees’ taller opponents forced the action to the space above the net. But the Dumpees were crafty as hell, and used all manner of
doinks and backhands to squirrel the ball over and around the long arms of natural blockers. They racked up a fair number of points in the early
rounds, and found themselves on the main court in the semifinals, against the beloved, second-ranked home team of Marcio Aratijo and Benja-
min Insfran.

Almost everything Metzger worked on at P3 manifested in crunch time. Metzger leapt off two legs for a ball at the net, and encountered
the bigger, longer, vastly more explosive Insfran. The Eurovision broadcaster, wittingly or not, touted a victory over kyphosis: “Great swing from
Stein Metzger! Arched his back and really unleashed on that one!”

The game’s final point was almost in slow motion: Metzger crouched before the net, hips back and low, as if he were preparing to do an
Olympic lift on the rolled-out mat in P3’s corner of the physical therapy studio. As Insfran skied to spike, Metzger leapt, too—up and, wisely, a tiny
bit left, where he sealed the victory with a block. An undersized player led the match in blocks. The Dumpees finished second in the world cham-
pionships. The points windfall was more than enough to get them to the Olympics.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Fonoimoana and Wong—the dumpers—finished in an eight-way tie for ninth.

At the Athens Olympics, the Dumpees finished tied for fifth overall, by far the best American team. Then they both found traditional
blocking partners. Metzger worked with Marcus to transition his body back to lateral explosiveness. That meant a lot of single-leg movements,
especially explosive sideways leaps known as lateral plyometrics. The classic hang clean lift was not new to Metzger, but he gets a religious tenor
in his voice when he describes how serious he and Marcus came to be about that barbell maneuver. It starts with knees slightly bent and the
weighted bar hanging across the front of the hips, arms straight. And then there’s a timed explosion. Almost every big group of muscles in the
legs (hamstrings, glutes, calves, quads) pushes up, as if jumping, as upper-body muscles (the shrugging shoulders, and pulling trapezius and
biceps) work to yank the bar up. It ends by catching the bar across the front of the shoulders, lowering into a deep squat, and standing again.
Metzger added weight and repetitions, and felt his body becoming twitchier, more electrified.

For two straight years, with two different partners, Metzger was on the top-ranked team in the US, with Holdren ranked second. “It felt like
I went from trying to perform on a race course in a VW bus to a Porsche,” says Metzger. All his career, he’d been able to see, in real time, balls that
were just out of reach. “And all of a sudden, I could get there.”

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

[un

eeoee5o5oeeoee3os«+#e3e3eee#eee8e8 @

The Dumbest Sport

If you challenge conventional wisdom, you will find ways to do things much better than they are currently done.

—Bill James

SIX-FOOT, FOUR-INCH ALL-AMERICAN linebacker and tight end Steve Zabel often made the newspaper for his “smashmouth” play. But on a

windy November weekend in 1969, Zabel made it into print for crying. His Oklahoma Sooners had lost—badly, unexpectedly—to Nebraska.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

One sportswriter called the Cornhuskers’ offensive line “Nebraska’s muscle curtain.” At one point, Nebraska rattled off five straight

touchdowns and a field goal. Quarterback Van Brownson—not known to be especially nimble—ran for eighty-two yards. In newsreel footage, the
Cornhuskers appeared immune to tackles.

Two things died that day: Oklahoma’s hopes for a spot in the Sun Bowl, and the idea that football players shouldn’t lift weights. Conven-
tional wisdom at the time held that pushing around heavy iron would make players “muscle-bound”—immobile as Clydesdales. The few team-
sport athletes who lifted were referred to as “barbell men.” (Sergio Oliva won the 1968 Mr. Olympia bodybuilding competition, and its thousand-
dollar prize, because nobody else competed.)

The Nebraska team was a few months into a groundbreaking weight training program led by an asthmatic pole vaulter named Boyd Epley.
Epley’s family was from Nebraska, but he had spent most of his childhood in Arizona, where his family moved in the hopes the desert air would
help his breathing. Epley first lifted weights as a ten-year-old in his buddy Danny’s garage. A couple of years later, his dad bought him a weight
kit that came with a brochure that taught fundamentals like dead lifts, bench presses, and squats. Epley put on twenty pounds over the summer

before his senior year and became an elite high school linebacker and record-setting pole vaulter for the junior college national champions, Phoe-
nix College. Epley transferred to Nebraska and set pole vaulting records indoors and out.

Then Epley hurt his back, stopped competing, and innovated his own recovery as the most devoted user of Nebraska’s cramped and
rudimentary weight room. After a few injured football players grew curious about Epley’s methods, he got a call from one of the football team’s
assistant coaches. Epley thought he might be in trouble for teaching football players to lift. Instead, he got two dollars an hour, two days a week,
to overhaul football training—and a warning that if any of the players got slower, he’d be fired.

At first, they barely had any equipment. Epley remembers running players through snatches, cleans, curls, and presses with a single 47.3-
pound bar weighted by paint cans full of dried concrete. To earn trust, Epley resolved to measure everything from maximum bench press to
vertical jump. To prove players weren’t getting slower, he raced players against the clock in the forty-meter sprint constantly, and showed the
times to the coaches.

The Huskers didn’t slow down as they became absolute beefcakes. Minneapolis Star Tribune columnist Joe Soucheray visited Nebraska’s

gym and reported seeing any number of football players, “none of whom had necks and any one of whom could play the villain in the next James
Bond movie.”

One of Epley’s early battles was to eliminate what had been the core of the team’s training before his arrival: five-mile runs. Football, Epley
says he explained in increasingly exasperated tones over his first few years, has no aerobic component at all. A play lasts about five seconds,

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

typically followed, Epley explained, by a fifty-second rest. Fifty seconds means a well-trained athlete can start the next play 100 percent fresh.
The team stopped running so much, and kept winning.

After the win at Oklahoma, the Huskers beat Georgia in the Sun Bowl, followed by national championships in 1970 and 1971, and three
more titles after that. Epley became the godfather of American strength coaches.

Epley assigned himself three years to collect and assess lessons from the bleeding edge of weight lifting. Mostly, he learned by visiting
competitions, entering, and very often winning. Epley was crowned Mr. Nebraska three years running. This made Epley an expert in the slightly
different fields of powerlifting (lifting the heaviest possible weights), bodybuilding (showing off muscles), and Olympic lifting (honing a tightly
defined set of explosive moves). Nebraska’s football players squatted, benched, and deadlifted like powerlifters, but also grew explosive with
Olympic moves like the power clean and push jerk.

Epley inched closer to the center of the sports world. He designed exercise equipment and a Reebok shoe. He formulated supplements. He
wrote books. He created an athleticism index. He designed a massive new training facility for Nebraska, and consulted on another, for Miami.

In 1978 Epley founded what is now known as the National Strength and Conditioning Association. An entire industry blossomed in
his wake. Evangelists of weight lifting can now be found wherever there are elite athletes, even in tennis, golf, ballet, Formula One, and video
gaming.

Epley’s hot knife of insight broke up ice floes of groupthink. Epley put to rest the idea that fast and mobile athletes couldn't benefit from
strength. This could have resulted in deeper curiosity: What other assumptions about the human body are wrong? What else did science have to
tell us?

Instead, to Marcus’s eyes, the berg of groupthink refroze in a slightly new shape—more or less around insight from the brochure that came
with Epley’s weight set. Today the organization Epley formed, the NSCA, says it has more than 60,000 “members and certified professionals.” In
Marcus’s experience, they’re as ardent about big muscles as football coaches once were about long runs.

Meanwhile, as Marcus was having force plates installed in P3’s new, expanded location, clues emerged that traditional strength training
only captured part of the story. Baseball pitchers who can throw the ball ninety-five miles an hour fell into two groups. There were enormous,
strong men who would ace NSCA tests like the bench press, but there was another class of player, too. This second group tended to be much
smaller than average players, and unremarkable in strength tests. But, fascinatingly, they scored exceptionally well on the lateral skater test.
Their super-skill appeared to be carrying force from the ground, up through the legs, through the many planes of a twisting torso, and down into
the arm and, ultimately, the ball. They had something cooking in the nervous system. And, interestingly, those players had almost all grown up
pitching.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Which dovetailed with another baseball mystery: Why was it that every elite player in this sport began playing before the age of twelve?
It’s not a simple case of practice making perfect in sports. Many NBA MVPs—Tim Duncan, Joel Embiid, Steve Nash, Hakeem Olajuwon—pivoted to
basketball only after puberty. But professional baseball players all grow up playing baseball. And some smaller athletes can throw the ball ninety-
five miles an hour without being superstrong.

Marcus realized that both mysteries emanate from the same bedrock: baseball is a rotational sport. Rotating is a kind of athleticism barely
considered by traditional strength training. “Traditionally, strength coaches train strength. Guys came in, they lifted weights, they left,” Marcus
says. At P3, though, they “were teaching movement.”

In a perfect world, your brain would have automated competent rotational movement, just as simply and instinctively as we open doors,
walk up stairs, or get out of bed.

But for many of us, instead, we have to think about how we move through complex things. This dynamic is especially obvious to anyone
in pain. “Part of it is broken,” Marcus says, remembering how knee soreness caused him to struggle in his weekly yoga class. “You have to just
piecemeal that whole thing together. It’s so tedious. It takes so much brain function. And it’s really like instead of one movement, this part, that
part, that part.”

The goal of a lot of P3 training is to make healthy movement automatic. “You just code for that rotational movement, and so you just reach
into that movement vocabulary you have to grab that thing and you do it,” he says.

P3 has dozens of rotational exercises. One favorite is to lie on your back, arms splayed, with a dumbbell anchoring each hand. Lift your two
legs together, soles facing the ceiling. With shoulders flat to the ground and legs glued together, swing your feet to the left side and twist so that
ten toes touch the floor, then lift them high again and do the same on the right. At P3 I watched torsos rotate many different ways in every warm-
up and workout, every day. They frequently recommend a clever thoracic mobility move where you sit on the floor with knees bent in front of
you, and lean back to press the middle of your back into a foam roller. Then let your knees fall together to the right, and then the left, three times
each. Then move the roller up your back one vertebra and try again. It lets you choose which segment of yourbacktotwist. ss”

There’s also rotation with force, from throwing medicine balls sideways to pulling cables with heavy resistance. These are activities you
may have encountered at a CrossFit class. But the chop bar march is not something you're likely to find at your local gym. With a back to the
Keiser cable machine, an athlete holds a bar attached to the cable in two hands, off to the right. Then, in one smooth movement, she pivots her
torso so she’s facing forward, hands on the bar out in front like she’s water-skiing. As she rotates, she also lifts her left knee to hip height. It ends
up being a rotational core muscle exercise and a balance drill—entirely typical of P3.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

This is the kind of stuff that was on Marcus’s mind when he got an invitation to speak at baseball’s winter meetings to the Professional
Baseball Strength and Conditioning Coaches Society—a group of NSCA-certified professionals who had banded together to professionalize
strength training in baseball.

Marcus accepted, flew to Indianapolis, and stood at a lectern, thinking this room full of men who revered Boyd Epley might also love the
cool science Marcus had to share. An early concern: “Looking out, I saw big necks, square shoulders, bald heads,” says Marcus. “All guys who have
more testosterone than is good for them.” The finest players in the world’s most rotational sport were being instructed in movement by men who
could not turn their necks.

The NSCA’s fixation on big muscles dovetails with a fuzzy position on anabolic steroids and performance-enhancing drugs. The USA

Strength and Conditioning Coaches Hall of Fame celebrates, for instance, pioneering coach Alvin Roy as “the first coach to administer (legal and

still not stigmatized) anabolic steroids to players.” Louis Riecke’s biography describes his advanced workouts as a young man, but adds “by this
time Riecke realized his spectacular gains resulted more from the daily anabolic.”

But getting stronger, Marcus says, can make you worse at sports, because tasks like hitting and throwing are multi-segmental. There’s
pushing from the ground, from the hips, the torso, shoulders, and arms. “You can get really strong in each segment and still not create a lot of
rotational power,” he says. “And now you got all this weight to carry around, which makes it hard to change direction. Beats on joints more. It’s
easy to do a whole lot of work on your shoulders and your deltoids and lose mobility in your shoulder and not be able to stick your arm straight
up over your head.”

Pushing big stacks of weights has another issue. “On the nervous system side,” Marcus says, “you train to do things slowly, and your body
starts thinking you need to do things slowly. Nothing about that is gonna make you faster, more explosive.”

As Marcus took the lectern, he was talking to professionals caught in the rising tide of baseball’s steroid scandal. Baseball’s strength
coaches had leveraged the early days of the scandal to get personal trainers banned from clubhouses. But in the years that followed, the scandal
mushroomed.

The training group’s first president, Fernando Montes, had been the Cleveland Indians’ strength coach when Canadian authorities found
drugs on a team plane. Montes also worked for the Texas Rangers when their slugger Alex Rodriguez was using PEDs.

Marcus spoke three years after the book Game of Shadows shocked baseball by reporting that the best player in baseball, Barry Bonds, had
been inspired to dope by watching other beloved stars Sammy Sosa and Mark McGwire. He spoke two years after the league’s Mitchell Report
exposed the breadth and depth of the problem, and shortly before McGwire—who had trained with people in Marcus’s audience—confessed to
doping.

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Meanwhile, at these very winter meetings, word spread that Brad Pitt had signed on to star in the movie of Michael Lewis’s book Moneyball.
That meant there’d be a major motion picture based on a best seller that cataloged baseball’s tired and outdated methods. The billionaire owner
of the Boston Red Sox, John Henry, was at the meetings, making noise about teams being backward.

Marcus brought an antsy audience a message that their ways were outdated. “I’m coming in with a lot of conviction,” Marcus remembers.
He opened by asking for a show of hands: Who had their pitchers go on “flush runs”? Long runs to flush lactic acid from pitchers’ bodies were an
entrenched tradition in baseball. Many hands went up.

Marcus said they should stop at once because pitchers don’t generate much lactic acid. Channeling Epley, who told the Nebraska coaches
that five-mile runs had no place in football, Marcus explained that a pitch is basically a one-meter sprint. Bodies don’t generate much lactic acid
at such distances. Anyway, lactic acid clears quickly, with or without a run. By the time these legends of pitching were lacing up their running
shoes the morning after a big game, there was no lactic acid left to flush.

But it was worse than that. After a certain level of fitness, maximizing muscles for endurance comes at the cost of explosion. “It’s not just
not helpful,” Marcus says, for one-meter sprinters to run five miles, “it’s interruptive.” That term hangs in the air before he adds: “That means it’s
harmful.” He finished his speech, suggesting that the work isn’t to be in better overall shape. It’s to tune your body to its precise task. None of the
coaches seemed to care.

Marcus says he genuinely thought these coaches would fist-bump him for helping to improve the performance of ace pitchers like Tim
Lincecum, Cliff Lee, and CC Sabathia. Instead, he felt hostility. This was later confirmed when Marcus met a strength coach who had heard

”)

Marcus speak in Indianapolis. “He shook my hand and said, ‘You might be fucking smart, but I fucking hate you,” remembers Marcus, who could
barely respond. “I was just too floored by it.”

Marcus was out of sorts in his hotel room after the speech. “I felt kind of dirty,” Marcus remembers. “Cultural whiplash, coming out of five
years at Harvard.” Marcus’s body had an ironic idea: a flush run. But in his carry-on the Californian hadn’t packed winter running gear, and that
weekend, Indianapolis had pause-inducing fifty-mile-an-hour winds, temperatures below zero, and intermittent freezing rain.

What the hell, thought Marcus. “In the middle of the run,” Marcus remembers thinking, “I was astonished at how much these guys didn’t
like me. My first instinct was to get away.”

The frigid air cooled him. Maybe the wolf pack’s reaction wasn’t personal. “People are feeling insecure about this earthquake that just went
through their world,” he says. “The more right you are, the bigger the earthquake.”

And there was another reason the strength coaches might have been rattled: they thought Marcus, or someone like him, might take their

jobs. And in fact, Marcus was sitting on MLB job offers. Confusing feelings coalesced on the run. “I got it clear as day,” Marcus says. “If you’re going

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

to practice your craft, you stand up. If they throw more tomatoes, you have to yell a little louder.” He would sign up with a team. “We gotta go
show these guys. Be a beacon.”

In 2010, Marcus became the Seattle Mariners’ director of sports science and performance. In 141 years of major-league baseball, no one
had held a title like that. Marcus negotiated the position so that he could do it while also running P3. He’d make regular visits to the Mariners
while his handpicked staffers spent the season with the players.

The first thing Marcus did was to remove almost all of the equipment from the Mariners gym, giving players room to jump, run, and lunge.
“They had three different calf raise machines,” he notes before almost yelling, “SPORT IS MOVEMENT! And you couldn’t take a long step in that
building.”

The Mariners would move, especially in ways that reduced players’ stretch-shortening cycle. Athletic movement often involves changing
directions. Wind the bat back and then explode forward into a home run swing. An outfielder brings the ball back before hurling it forward. Many
of the fastest people—NBA players starting their drives to the rim, MLB players stealing second—make their first step backward. It’s often called
a “false step,” and coaches have long trained it away by putting an empty soda can behind the athlete’s foot—it clatters away when the athlete’s

foot involuntarily moves backward before going forward. The surprise has come from a flood of biomechanical research that shows the false step

gets most athletes to their destination faster, because of the stretch-shortening cycle in that planted leg.

Research from the earliest days of sports science in the Soviet Union had demonstrated that you could generate more power by training
the two movements, in opposite directions, into one snappy event. A classic example: most people can jump higher by running into a jump,
because they can translate a little downward force of landing into the upward movement of jumping. A whole school of training developed to
make those movements faster and more efficient. The Soviets called it the shock method; in the US we call them plyometrics, and Marcus loves
them to this day.

As plyometrics caught on in the United States, the NSCA published guidelines saying athletes should only perform plyometrics once they

are strong enough to squat one and a half times their body weight. “That was the standard that was held out for a long time,” Marcus says, “and
kids are doing plyometrics all the time. Jumping out of trees! They’re playing tag! They’re skipping! They can’t squat one and a half times their
body weight, generally, or maybe ever. And they’re all doing plyometrics. So, that’s not the problem. The problem is just mechanics.” In practical
terms, it meant Marcus watching closely, and coaching baseball players to be bouncier, quicker, and more explosive.

Marcus ruffled feathers by telling the Seattle beat writers that some of the Mariners “don’t seem like they should make a college sports
team, in terms of athleticism.” The beauty of the wide-open gym, Marcus said, was that unathletic players would come in and do big, explosive

movements, and “there’s nowhere for them to hide their lack of athleticism. It just stands out like crazy.”

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

When spring training kicked off in Peoria, Arizona, Marcus got a chance to meet his new coworkers all together for the first time. Looking
around the striped green infield, he saw “all these middle-aged guys with Dunkin’ Donuts coffee cups, which they were using to spit chew into.
They wanted nothing to do with me. I could see it was going to be a struggle.”

One of his new bosses cautioned Marcus to go slow—he said it would take a decade to affect real cultural change. “I didn’t have a decade,”
Marcus says. “We're not curing polio here. If you can’t make it measurably better, if you can’t really move the needle—what’s the point? ... The
normal routines were violating laws of biomechanics and needed to change.”

Marcus escaped to the cheap seats to make two phone calls. “I remember crawling up into the top of the stadium and calling my dad. I
called a Catholic priest I’ve been close to for a long time. I just wasn’t sure I could do it.”

Ultimately, Marcus decided to stay and began building his staff. One of his hires in Seattle was a scientist named Charles Kenyon. The bulk
of Kenyon’s research had been in phylogenetics, digging deep into the relationship between orchid species. “Great,” Marcus remembers thinking,
“we got the orchid guy.”

But Charles had an impeccable scientific mind, experience at two elite performance facilities, and plans to go to medical school.

Marcus asked Charles, and former pro player Danny Garcia—who had trained at P3—to be the faces of P3 in Seattle. Charles had been
working with baseball players at P3 and loved it, and was from Seattle, so he deferred medical school and moved.

Marcus had negotiated dominion over the minor leaguers in the Mariners organization but had less influence over the major-league

players. (Mariners star Ken Griffey Jr. responded to Marcus’s arrival by saying he would keep working out the way he had before. Griffey missed
129 games that season.) For those on his program, Marcus banned flush runs and added a ton of rotational movements, plyometrics, and explo-
sive lateral movements. He also integrated overhead weights, which baseball had long treated with superstition, and the Keiser cable machine,
which almost no one in baseball had seen before. Soon, players were holding the yard-long handle and chopping away to gain rotational quick-
ness through the strike zone.

Veteran outfielder Eric Byrnes told reporters he loved feeling explosive. Minor-league third baseman Kyle Seager embraced everything

about P3 and became a major-league All-Star.

Charles is a doctor now, a physiatrist at the University of Washington, and says he’s proud of P3’s work with the Mariners, even if they
“kind of rubbed against the culture and the tradition.” Marcus wanted players to reduce their reliance on traditional weight lifting and learn how
to move. Charles says the staff learned something, too: that the science meant nothing unless “you can have that conversation with the athlete”
and “translate all the findings in a way that he or she cares about.” If you can “convince them that’s the first reason youre there, and they feel

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

supported, and that you’re connecting with them deeper than just the athlete level,” Charles says, “I think that’s where having that data becomes
really powerful.”

The immovable rock was the strength coach, who, not surprisingly, resisted Marcus’s efforts.

The conflict came to a head over the high-salaried pitcher Erik Bédard. “Left-handed pitcher, paid a fair amount,” remembers Marcus. “And
he’s coming off elbow and two shoulder surgeries. He was so promising on the mound, but had missed two or three seasons. I saw him getting
ready for his third bench press workout of the same week. He was super-overdeveloped in his chest and biceps with his knucklehead workout
program. His poor posture was putting load on his shoulder and elbow—this wouldn't help.”

Marcus could see that Bédard might easily get hurt again, and keeping the pitcher healthy was his job. “I laid it out to them. What I got back
was: ‘I don’t like people who try to figure things out.’ That came from the player, but standing next to him was the strength coach who looked
very satisfied.”

Whether or not the strength coach had directed Bédard to say this, it was very clear that the strength coach wasn’t going to let Marcus
replace or reduce the strength workouts. The ideal solution for Marcus would have been to remove the strength coach, but the GM made clear to

Marcus that this wasn’t an option. Marcus finished his three-year contract and says that “baseball is definitely the dumbest sport.”

 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Id)

Land

She could not grasp exactly what to do next, but she kept moving as if her life depended

on it, which in some ways, it did.

—James McBride


Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

WHEN PROFESSIONAL BEACH volleyball player Katie Spieler was tiny, her family would drop her into a Boston Whaler and sputter out of Santa
Barbara Harbor. Their destination was often the Channel Islands, five peaks that poke out of the Pacific, Lord of the Rings dramatic, dotted with
private coves and beaches where a young family can cut the tethers of civilization.

Katie spent whole afternoons there, snorkeling among the sea cucumbers and Garibaldi fish. She leapt off boulders, surfed waves, and
climbed sheer faces. She darted about like a bottlenose. Nothing felt impossible.

At home in Santa Barbara, Katie and her sister Cara spent their days in the sun—in the San Marcos Foothills and on East Beach. The only
problem for Katie was that her two favorite things—beach volleyball tournaments and the Stud Ironman beach lifeguard competition—fell on
the same Tuesday. Katie made it work. “I would go play the beach volleyball tournament, and I would, like, win that, and then I would go and
race over down the beach to junior lifeguards.” Katie’s friend Chrissy, a counselor, would run a second session just for Katie. “Eight times you doa
swim, out to a buoy,” Katie says, “run to the next lifeguard tower, swim the buoy, and do the same thing all the way to the pier and back from East
Beach.” Chrissy and Katie are still friends.

“That was, like, my favorite day of the year,” Katie says.

Legends of volleyball like Kathy Gregory and Karch Kiraly came through East Beach. Little Katie noticed how tall the best players were, and
hoped she’d grow. The women’s net is 7.35 feet in the air; the best hitters play well above that. Sometimes Katie teases her mom for “marrying
a short guy.” Instead of blocking balls at the net, Katie became a defender. In a typical action photo, Katie is sandy and horizontal. Serving and
placement skills made her a star at the powerhouse University of Hawaii. When she graduated in 2016, she became an inspiration to normal-
sized players everywhere by joining the AVP Pro Tour at five-foot-five—a full foot shorter than some competitors.

Pro beach volleyball doesn’t generally offer glamorous salaries. To make ends meet, Katie and her Hawaii teammate Dana Kabashima
started a volleyball academy on East Beach, home of Katie’s one-girl Stud Ironman. It foundered in its second season. “We always laugh about it,”
Katie says, “but we had almost one student.” But while it was in operation, Katie and Dana printed up fliers and looked for athletes, eventually
finding themselves in front of P3. P3 had graduated, in 2009, from the physical therapist’s office to a former nightclub space in the Funk Zone, a
revitalized industrial neighborhood just off the beach. Katie knew that professional athletes, including NBA and MLB players, worked out there.
And she had met a couple of P3 trainers on the volleyball court. They seemed serious about their jobs—and pretty good at volleyball, too.

But the place had neither a sun-splashed reception area nor any kind of front desk. P3 didn’t even have a sign—just a black logo on white
walls and the muted pulse of hip-hop from within.

8 mins left in chapter 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Entering felt like slipping into church with the service underway. As their eyes adjusted, Katie and Dana heard hollers over the music, and
saw they were standing at the start line of a track that sloped up to the back wall. To their right were nine scuffed wooden steps and a raised area
with an L-shaped black faux leather couch. Most of the light came from a row of high windows down the right wall.

In front of everything, down three steps from the couches, running the width of the entire building, lay the star of the show: a fifty-by-
sixty-foot open black floor with the high ceilings and airy feeling of a dance studio—but dotted with cable machines, squat racks, plyometric
boxes, and other strange gym equipment.

A workout was ending. A trainer in a black T-shirt chatted with three long-limbed, lean-muscled people in the sweaty afterglow of hard
work.

No one seemed to think it was weird that two stray volleyballers had wandered in. Katie recognized the trainer from the beach and said
hello. Sam Brown was easy to talk to and curious about volleyball. He walked them around and pointed out the force plates, which looked like the
checked-bag scales at the airport. Eventually, Katie and Dana handed over a fistful of fliers, nice and easy.

On the way out, Dana turned to Katie and asked, “Why don’t you train here?”

7 mins left in chapter


Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Follow for extended description

LATERAL MEDICINE BALL TOSS

I do my own thing, Katie remembers thinking impulsively, reflecting on her intense bike rides, swims, and hill sprints. I’m a very self-made
athlete. To any normal observer, she’s a portrait of lean muscle. But Katie has always felt that her advantages were mostly in her head and heart:
a willingness to learn, to work, and to adapt.

On the pro tour, though, even the tall players had Katie’s grit and adaptability. Maybe Dana was right.

Katie arrived for her first session to booming music and a workout in full swing. A lot of gyms write one workout on a whiteboard for every
athlete to follow. P3 doesn’t have a whiteboard. Here, it seemed no two people followed the same program.

A hundred times at other gyms she’d seen someone pick up a heavy medicine ball, usually to toss it up high off the wall and then catch it
again; a “wall ball.” At P3, she watched a guy—was he a major-league baseball player?—who started with a heavy medicine ball in two hands on
his chest, but then he whaled it sideways, grunting angrily, hard into the cinder-block wall. A regular wall ball is said to work quads, glutes, anda
few other muscles. This... it was hard to even imagine the muscles in play.

The ball smacked the wall. A screen displayed the velocity: thirty miles an hour. “Awww.” He was bummed.

Across the room, a coach whooped and hollered, cheering as a football player pounded out salsa-like rhythms on a plywood platform. A
woman held a heavy plate as she dipped into a lunge—that’s pretty normal—but she had the heel of her front foot hovering off a ledge, which was
new to Katie.

Katie says she “honestly had no clue what they were doing in there,” but understood, “Okay, this is more than just a gym.”

Sam grabbed a clipboard and directed Katie to a physical therapy table. They went through her medical history, which didn’t take long as
she’d never really been hurt. What happened next was like a physical, but instead of listening to lungs with a stethoscope, he pushed her heel
toward her butt, first on one side, then the other. She lay on her back, with one leg in the air and knee bent; Sam put a hand on her knee, to hold
it in place, and then swung her foot like the arm of a clock. He wrote down everything: how far it could easily swing inward toward her midsec-
tion, and outward over the floor.

Movement to Katie had meant leaping from rocks or snorkeling or flying over the sand to dig out a hard-hit ball; it felt strange to reduce
all that to Sam’s clipboard.

6 mins left in chapter 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Sam had Katie face a patch of wall near the bathroom door. She bent her leg to touch a kneecap to the white-painted wall. Easy. Now, he
said, move your foot back, keep your heel locked to the floor, and touch your knee to the wall again. There were numbers marked on the floor, like
aruler. He found the furthest point where she could still touch, and wrote it down, then held a little gizmo to her shin to measure her shin angle,
and wrote that down, too.

Then they got to hopping. She faced forward, with a small dowel on the floor parallel to the outside of her foot. The goal was to leap
sideways over the dowel off two pressed-together feet (easy!) and back (great!) as many times as possible in eight seconds (mind-melting). She
managed thirty-two hops in eight seconds.

“That was pretty intense,” Katie remembers. The dowel test felt like reacting, on the beach, to a hard-hit volleyball; she felt she should be
good at it. But later, she watched a video of some kid with bleached hair, black socks, and a white shirt with SOCCER across the front. He set a P3
record by hammering across that dowel forty-three times in eight seconds. She felt self-conscious about her performance. “All the other athletes
are working out and then you're getting tested and then everyone’s kind of watching you.” She remembers thinking, Okay, here’s going to be not
their top assessment!

Sam nodded to the back of the room, where Katie met the people running the computers. With great care, the black-T-shirted P3 staffers
stuck twenty-two reflective markers on Katie’s feet, shins, knees, thighs, hips, and torso like she was going to be in a video game. Then she spent
fifteen minutes doing whatever weird movements they told her to do, while technicians hovered over computer screens learning things about
her.

Here the music seemed louder and the other athletes closer. Just behind Katie, in a giant floor-to-ceiling rig, a very strong man squatted
with a bar across his back, weights on the bar, and an enormous heavy chain curling like a boa constrictor, up from the floor, across his shoulders,
and back to the floor on the other side.

Much of the assessment was jumping. So much jumping! Jump as high as you can off the force plate however you want. Then off two legs,
now off one. Step off an eighteen-inch red-metal plyometric box, land on two feet on the force plates, then jump as high as you can. Katie remem-
bers thinking that it would be awesome if, after training here for a while, she could jump like Michael Jordan.

The feeling crept in that the stakes were high. Professional athletes flirt with professional mortality all the time. It struck Katie that the
biomechanists in black T-shirts, looking at computer screens, might know more about her athletic future than she did.

Sam directed Katie to leap off one leg, then land on that same leg on the force plate. Okay fine, but the test wasn’t to see how far or high she
could jump. It was how quickly she could settle into stillness after landing.

6 mins left in chapter 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Then, with her left foot on the force plate, Sam told Katie to explode hard and fast to her right. This “one-off skater” is part of every P3
assessment, and measures movement crucial to playing NBA defense, stealing a base, or Katie’s calling card: reacting to hard-hit volleyballs.

Around then, Katie began to sweat. She suspected she wasn’t getting an A. “My strength is figuring it out, learning something and learning
it quick, and then getting good at it quickly,” Katie says. “But with those things, it was kind of hard for me because I don’t know what to do to
actually make this better in the moment.” No one studies for this pop quiz. One of the drills included a big wooden dowel—a giant’s broomstick
—across her shoulders. Then she rotated left and right as much as she easily could, measuring the rotational mobility of her upper spine. How
do you ace that?

When it was finally done, they invited her to peek at the computer monitors. On video, Katie stepped off the box and landed on two feet.
In another window on the computer screen, her animated skeleton moved like a dancing X-ray.

A third window contained a comedic opera of numbers—too many to make sense of, even with Katie’s degree in accounting. How hard
did she land on her right foot versus her left? How long was she on the ground before exploding upward? What speed did she explode out of the
skater to the right? They could go all day.

The P3 staff did not say, “Soon you'll be jumping like MJ.” Instead, there was the whiff of worry. These nice people, she felt, had bad news.

Katie was one of the smallest athletes P3 had ever assessed. But when she stepped off an eighteen-inch box, she landed with a peak force
of 3,100 newtons. P3’s head of biomechanics, Eric Leidersdorf, remembers it sounded “a little bit like, I don’t know, a sack of bricks hitting the
ground.” It takes about twenty-five newtons to spike a volleyball, and double that to throw a baseball ninety miles an hour. A punch from a pro-
fessional boxer packs about a thousand newtons.

Thirty-one hundred newtons isn’t a number a human body can readily generate. It takes, say, athree-hundred-pound male bighorn sheep.
“Mating competition involves two rams running toward one another,” says the National Wildlife Federation website, “at speeds around 40 miles
an hour and clashing their curled horns, which produces a sound that can be heard a mile away.” That’s two rams, each a hundred pounds heavier
than Usain Bolt, and almost twice the speed. The bighorn sheep, the website says, connect head-on with a “maximum fighting force” of 3,400
newtons.

In other words: landing is hard. That was something P3 measured more than anyone. When P3 moved to the former nightclub, Marcus
got a new loan to install side-by-side force plates in the floor, encased in tons of concrete. “It’s like a scale,” Marcus says, “but it’s a really precise,
complex scale that gives us information in all these dimensions—not just down.” Marcus had never heard of another training facility using force
plates, but he thought it would be enlightening. “If we understand how you push into the ground,” says Marcus, “then it can teach us a lot about

what’s happening above the ground.”

5 mins left in chapter 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

One thing they learned is that athletes push into the ground hard. Katie’s alarming numbers demanded attention, but were hardly unseen
on P3’s force plates; the house record is 11,000 newtons.

Maybe you remember the egg drop competition, where a physics teacher handed out tape, straws, balloons, paper cups, and the like? The
assignment is to build a contraption to keep an egg from breaking when tossed from some window or ladder.

Katie’s not an egg, and an eighteen-inch plyometric box isn’t a second-story window. But an egg and a volleyball player both free-fall with
sufficient kinetic energy to shatter. High school students cushion their egg’s landing with plastic shopping bags as parachutes, balloons, sacks of
popcorn, rubber bands—you name it.

3 mins left in chapter 
Kindle

BALLISTIC: THE NEW SCIENCE OF INJURY-FREE ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE

Humans in free fall have a different set of tools: legs. To keep our heavy heads and torsos from cracking, our legs evolved over eons to bend
in three places: the ankle, knee, and hip. To a biomechanist, each joint is a hinge, supported by strong tissues like the Achilles, calves, quads, and
glutes. There are ways those tissues can work beautifully together and absorb forces that would otherwise be devastating.

Katie had grown up playing on soft sand, and landed with her toes pointed downward. That’s an absolute red flag to P3. The problem is
that after the toes absorb the first little whiff of force, the middle of the foot, which is wired to some of the strongest soft tissues in the body,
barely participates. Then the remainder comes crashing down on the only part of the foot that’s bony, hard, and noisy: the heel. P3’s biggest im-
pact numbers always come from heels.

Just as there are many ways to tape together drinking straws that won’t protect an egg, there are many dangerous ways to land. Imagine
someone painting an analog clock on the ground. Imagine that Katie lands with her foot in the dead center. Where’s the knee? What time does it
tell? Ideally, none: the knee would hover over the ball of the foot at the heart of the clock face while the weight of her torso falls onto her sinking
hips. But in reality, those knees often lean and point to times like three o’clock or nine o’clock, each of which raises concerns.

A strong lower leg changes things a bit. An NFL wide receiver curling around a cornerback could plant his right foot in the middle of the
clock and keep a healthy knee at nine o’clock. The foot can even tip a little, with the inside raising up. But there’s a line the P3 biomechanists call
the “asymptote of doom” after which the foot just gives up and rolls into a classic ankle sprain.

Issues can also arise before that point. Just landing with your knee a little bit toward three o’clock tests the slender little fifth metatarsal
on the outside of the foot. When this breaks, they call it a Jones fracture, and it’s one of the NBA’s more common injuries, having afflicted Kevin
Durant, Brook Lopez, CJ McCollum, and Rasheed Wallace. And so it goes around the clock. Put too much force on nine o’clock, and you'll start to
hear people worrying about the anterior cruciate ligament on the inside of the knee.

Then there’s Katie’s habit of landing forward on toes, knees at noon, then slapping down at the bottom of the clock face with heels. Every
time Katie landed, the big forces of the ground didn’t travel up her body’s chain of protective soft tissues. Instead, they zipped efficiently and
smoothly through bony heels and up her tibias. At the top of the tibia sits the tender little collection of moving parts called the knee.

No one’s biomechanically perfect. We all misplace little forces; over time it can make us creaky. “Kids can jump around and do whatever,”
says author and elite running coach Steve Magness. “Over time, we narrow our capacity. Without practice, we lose range of motion, fast-twitch
muscles, a lot of the things that let us move ballistically.” But Katie’s P3 assessment didn’t just show minor misplaced forces; it revealed that the
slap of Katie’s heels put her on track for a major knee injury.

P3 would blend Katie’s assessment data with insight from medicine, mechanical engineering, biomechanics, data science, neuroscience,
machine learning, and athletic training. They’d give her body tools to land differently.

3 mins left in chapter